2.47 WHAT IS MORE IMPORTANT?
Comparison of Various Recommendations 
When it comes to diet and lifestyle guidelines, my experience has shown that people have a tendency to focus on some recommendations lot more than others. I have seen people go out of their way to procure organic veggetables while they still continue to eat late dinners. Some totally disregard the therapeutic fasting recommendation while going extra length to avoid a piece of cake with egg in it. This raises a question, as to the relative importance of various recommendations in the dietary guidelines. This post is intended to cover this topic. These are my opinions based on what I have learned in the past 8 years from the leading doctors in this field and feedback received from thousands of members. Clearly there is some disagreement among the giants in this field. Assuming you have good support of family and friends and spiritually at pease, here are most important steps to take in declining order of importance purely from health perspective. 
1. Avoiding toxic foods like tobacco, hydrogenated oils (Dalda, Crisco etc.) and highly processed meat products like ham, salami, pepperoni, bologna, bacon, hot dogs etc. These are all classified as Group-1 carcinogens by WHO. 
2. Avoiding sugary and diet beverages like Coke, Pepsi, Seven-Up etc. 
3. Eating fruits & vegetables and green juice. 
4. Avoiding even the moderate (1-2 drinks/day) consumption of alcoholic beverages like beer, wine and other hard liquors.
5. Intermittent Fasting and early dinners. 
6. Avoiding cakes, donuts, mithai and ice cream.
7. Avoiding unprocessed animal food like chicken, goat, lamb, pork and beef. 
8. Physical Activity; walking 10,000 steps or 5 minute activity every waking hour. 
9. Biweekly and Prolonged fasting.
10. Avoiding dairy and eggs. 
11. Eating Nuts&Seeds for Omega-3 and selenium.
12. Avoiding Excessive refined sugar and oil. 
13. Avoiding unprocessed sea food like sardines, shrimp, crab, lobster etc. 
14. Avoiding processed foods like white flour, breakfast cereals, crackers, white bread etc. 
15. Avoiding fresh water fatty fish like salmon. 
16. Replacing regular produce with organic produce. 
Some of you may find few surprises in the above list. 
I have split animal food into five categories: Fresh water fish, Shell fish, dairy and eggs, muscle meat and processed meat because they are not equally harmful. Of course the worst offender are processed meats and trans fats found in hydrogenated fats. Some surprises you may find are :
* Fresh water fatty fish is less harmful than many processed vegan foods. 
* Alcohol in moderation is less harmful than sugary soft drinks. 
* Intermittent Fasting is more health promoting than giving up meat. 
* Avoiding excessive sugar and oil is low on the list because worst offenders have been separated and listed higher. 
To conclude, I want to suggest that you all do a self evaluation and make sure you that while focusing on some minor details you are not skipping important measures necessary for better health.
