7.6 BLOOD THINNERS
One of the most commonly prescribed medications for Cardiovascular diseases is blood thinners. In fact it become a common practice to prescribe a daily dose of baby aspirin to all men over age 50 and women over 60. This was recommended by the National Institute of Health.
Aspirin was first found to reduce the risk of fatal and nonfatal heart attacks 30 years ago, and subsequent studies found evidence that aspirin may also reduce risk of stroke and colon cancer. In 2018 a quarter of the adults over 40 were taking daily dose of baby aspirin. We have known for years that blood thinning caused by aspirin, increases the chances of internal bleeding as it affects the blood’s coagulation mechanism. But doctors felt that benefits outweighed the risk. 
A new study authored by Mark Ebell of University of Georgia in 2019 found that this was not so and except for those who had a history of heart attack, the aspirin caused more harm than good. He found that taking daily baby aspirin increases chances of brain bleeding which is a life threatening condition. The finding were so significant that it was broadcast in the evening network news. 
I hope no body (except heart patients) in this group are still taking a daily baby aspirin. 
The other point I want make is that there are certain spices in our kitchen which have same blood thinning advantage without the risk of bleeding. Regular consumption of them obliviates the need for baby aspirin for heart patients also.Natural blood thinners can be grouped into four types:
1. Foods rich in vitamin E like green leafy vegetables. 
2. Foods containing Salycylates like berries, cherries, oranges and grapes and herbs like cayenne pepper, ginger, cinnamon. 
3. Food rich in omega-3 like flaxseed, Chiaseeds and walnuts. 
4. Foods rich in natural antibiotics like onions and garlic. 
Daily Aspirin no longer required.
https://www.nbclosangeles.com/.../daily-aspirin.../314184/
Natural Blood Thinners
https://youtu.be/OqDo0SDJ-Mc
Instead of using baby aspirin which has harmful side effects one should use these plants. 
Plants with Aspirin inspirations.
https://youtu.be/mnfo6xRRfpY
