8.4 IS  INSULIN  USE  SAFE?
Many diabetics after first few years on drugs move on to taking insulin shots. Your doctor may say that insulin is safe but there is some confusion as to the safety of insulin and this post is intended to clarify that. 
Body deposits glucose into muscle cells using insulin as a key to open the lock to get inside the muscle cells. Body also converts extra sugar into fat but fat is not converted back into sugar. When body runs out of sugar, fat converts into ketone bodies that provide energy. 
Body always maintains a certain minimum level of insulin called basal insulin. It remains in your body even when you do not consume food. The additional insulin released when you eat your food is Bolus insulin which is fast acting and short cycle. 
In type-2 diabetes a combination of two things may happen one is insulin insensitivity as I discussed in the previous post, the second is reduced production of insulin by the pancreas. In such cases increasing insulin sensitivity alone may not be sufficient and some supplemental insulin may be required. All those patients who are asked to take insulin are not suffering from lack of insulin production. The number of such cases are very few. 
Contrary to what you might have been told, insulin is not very safe. It has some severe side effects that need to watched carefully. Here is a list of the side effects both serious and not so serious. 
1. Hypoglycemia: causing blood glucose level to go dangerously low resulting in fainting or even death. 
You must reduce your insulin dose or medication doses at the same time you make changes to your diet and lifestyle. Do not start juice fast without cutting down your insulin or diabetic medications.
2. Insulin makes you gain weight (fat) or makes it hard  to lose fat.
3. Insulin injections can sometimes cause systemic allergies like Itching and rash across the body, trouble breathing, nausea, rapid heart rate, sweating and low BP.
4. Lipodystrophy: symptoms include thickening or pitting of skin and patches. 
5. Oedema: swelling of arms and ankle
6. Other miscellaneous side effects:
* Headache
* Flue like symptoms
* Dizziness, lightheadedness, shakiness and blurred vision
* Tingling in your hands, feet, lips, or tongue
* Trouble concentrating or confusion 
* Hunger 
Please watch the attached videos linked below on the subject. 👇
Insulin is the cause of most major Illnesses.
https://youtu.be/Kmhvx9uCV-8
