2.9 MILK & DAIRY PRODUCTS 
In the documentary Forks over Knives this subject has been covered in great detail explaining how protein in milk (casein) causes cancer tumor to grow. We will discuss it in more detail when we cover the subject of cancer. Milk is also heavily implicated in breast cancer and prostate cancer. Also a leading cause of type-1 diabetes and arthritis. Milk consumption is a leading cause of auto immune diseases which get initiated when the milk protein leaks through our gut lining and enters blood stream without being metabolized in the liver. 
Humans are the only creatures on earth who consume milk of another species. Also we are the only creatures who continues to consume milk beyond infancy. I do not know how it got started. I suspect it happened thousands of years ago, during a period of famine, when people were dying of hunger. Some body tried drinking cow’s milk and survived. From then on it became a common practice and it must have led to domestication of cows. 
While we are on the subject of milk, I might as well confess that this is one topic where I feel most conflicted. The current plant based whole food movement is opposed to consuming milk products and there are numerous studies that justify that but Ayurveda, our cultural heritage and ancient wisdom recommends it strongly. Although some have pointed out to me that certain practitioners of Ayurveda in Kerala recommend against it. 
Most recommendations of PBWF doctors are compatible with Ayurveda with the exception of milk and Ghee. This is how I look at it: 
1. The way the cows are raised in today’s industrialized world, is very different from even 60 years ago in India. Some key differences are:
(1) The dairy cows are kept pregnant through artificial insemination. 
(2) They are fed pesticide ridden food which is unfit for human consumption.
(3) They are injected with growth hormones to increase milk yield and 
(4) They are injected with high dosages of antibiotics to keep them infection free in otherwise poor unhygienic conditions. 
All these toxic chemicals do show up in the milk they produce and are very harmful to human health. 
2. The indigenous varieties of cows in India (ones with a hump on their back) produce milk called A2, which is genetically different and low in fat besides some other differences. This milk is less harmful than buffalo milk but harmful never the less. 
3. In olden periods there were no carcinogens in the environment and cancer diseases were not there or rare. So even if Casein (protein in cow’s milk) was consumed in diet, it didn’t result in ill tumor growth. 
4. The life expectancy was low and age of 75-80 was considered long life. Very few lived beyond that (I am not talking about puranic period where there are unsubstantiated stories of people living for 400 years). Today we are talking about increasing life expectancy of retired people (over 65) to 100+ years. In Blue Zones around the world like Okinawa Japan, Sardinia Italy and Loma Linda California, many people live to be 100+.
I have discussed this subject face to face with Dr. Colin Campbell, Dr. Esselston, Dr. John Mcdugall and Dr. Gregor. They all are against consuming milk or milk products in today’s world. Dr. Collin Campbell conceded that if total protein in diet is less than 8% then milk may be okay, as long as it is procured from grass fed free range cows. Total protein intake of 8% (from all sources) is the cutoff point where tumor begins to grow. What this essentially means is that during periods of famine, the milk would not be harmful. 
So this is how I have resolved the conflict in my life. I do no drink milk or eat milk products on daily basis. I consume nut milks, soya milk, coconut milk and oat milk. I consume  small amount of cultured yogurt occasionally as exceptions (with khitchri, pulao, or Kadhi). I eat on average 1/2 scoop of ice cream per month to makes my grand kids happy. In essence what I am saying is that use milk products as exception only. I do allow some exceptions but only after you have reversed your chronic diseases and gotten off all medications. 
You have to make your own exceptions. But if you are like Bill Clinton with open hear surgery and multiple stents or you are suffering from stage 2/3 cancer please refrain totally.
For Indian style tea and coffee, Oat milk is the best. We make oat milk by adding one cup rolled oats, 1/4 cup cashew and 4 cups of water in a blender. It has a shelf life in refrigerator of 4 days. Other favorites at our home are coconut milk for puddings and almond and soya milk. Peanut milk for yogurts is good for Indian dishes like Raita and Kadhi.
There are many choices for vegan milk and most of them if made at home are very healthy. A video on how to make alternate milks is posted below.
Here are 12 Reasons Why Milk is Bad for You
https://www.peta.org/living/food/reasons-stop-drinking-milk/
Dairy: 6 Reasons Why You Should Avoid  it All Costs
https://youtu.be/0O-ehIkwGME
What the Dairy Industry Doesn’t Want You to Know
https://youtu.be/h3c_D0s391Q
Does Cassein in Milk Exposure Trigger Type 1 Diabetes?
https://youtu.be/bDZHBaiSHWo
Milk, Thpe1 Diabetes and Autoimmune Disease
https://youtu.be/MScEmjsVXNE
Is Milk Bad for Diabetes?
https://youtu.be/LZO7ORbtk-Y
Ten Homemade Nut & Nondairy Milks
https://youtu.be/UWM_SpUndV8
