8.7 ARTIFICIAL SWEETENERS 
The use of artificial sweeteners has expanded rapidly in the last half century. There is lot of confusion about the benefits and the harms of artificial sweeteners. Many people, specially overweight and Diabetics consume them thinking they are helping themselves. This is totally incorrect and research shows that artificial sweeteners cause weight gain and diabetes. 
That artificial sweeteners are unhealthy, is often perceived by different people to mean different things.
* Some think that there is something toxic about the sweetener and it may cause cancer or some other horrible disease. This is true for some sweeteners but not all. 
* Some think that it is bad because it is highly processed so they look for unprocessed versions like stevia leaves, monk fruits and agave. This is also totally incorrect. 
The point that some how gets lost is that it is not necessarily something that is inherently bad about the substance; it is how our body reacts to it, which often is the problem. When human tongue tastes sweetness, it triggers various responses in the body of releasing hormones and satiation mechanisms. The best known of which is call on pancreas to release insulin. 
Studies have shown that people who consume beverages made with artificial sweeteners, land up eating more calories in the meal that followed. This is because those who get real sugar with their beverage feel satiated and do not eat as much during meal. 
When we consume zero caloric sweeteners, the pancreas release insulin but in the absence of sugar, the insulin has no where to go and stays in the blood. The presence of high levels of insulin in the blood, signals the liver to convert the fructose in the diet into fat and not glucose. This fat is sent to subcutaneous fat layer (under skin) for storage. This delays the feeling of satiation and one tends to overeat. 
There are many studies on this subject however many are funded by the food industry and are structured more to confuse people rather than clarify. Most independent studies done on this subject (which were not funded by the industry) have supported this finding. This is no longer a debated fact. What is still debated is the precise mechanism by which this happens. I give here evidence from two very large studies on this subject. 
1. The American Cancer Society conducted a survey of 78,694 women, hoping to find that artificial sweeteners had a beneficial effect on weight. Instead, the survey showed exactly the opposite. After adjustment for initial weight, over a one-year period, those using artificial sweeteners were significantly more likely to gain weight.
2. Dr. Sharon Fowler, from the University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio, in the 2008 San Antonio Heart Study prospectively studied 5,158 adults over eight years. She found that instead of reducing the obesity, diet beverages substantially increased the risk of it by a mind- bending 47 percent. She writes, “These findings raise the question whether (artificial sweetener) use might be fueling—rather than fighting—our escalating obesity epidemic.”
Conflicting reports often generate confusion within nutritional science. One study will show a benefit and another study will show the exact opposite. Researchers looked at seventeen different reviews of sugar-sweetened drinks and weight gain. A full 83 percent of studies sponsored by food companies did not show a relationship between sugar- sweetened drinks and weight gain. But independently funded studies showed the exact opposite—83 percent showed a strong relationship between sugar-sweetened drinks and weight gain.
CONCLUSION:
I advise against all artificial sweeteners. My recommendations for sweeteners are Dates, Date syrup or date Sugar, Black Strap Molasses, Raw Honey and Jaggery, in that order.
Why you should ditch Artificial Sweeteners
https://youtu.be/F7x_2f7uQyc
Mayo Clinic Minute
https://youtu.be/6ORT3v1ez6s
Those who would like to understand this topic of artificial sweeteners and why they should be avoided, in more details should watch this video. 
Dr.Doron Sher- Artificial Sweetners
https://youtu.be/Kc0_4HDZZqI
