2.30 WHEN TO EAT
Circadian rhythm of day and night is encoded into our genes. Many behaviors that we have modified in the last century and a half, as a result on modern inventions of light bulb and electricity, have interfered with our circadian rhythm and caused havoc with our health. It is only in the last decade that we have paid attention to this field and work of Dr. Satchin Panda of UC SanDiego and others have thrown new light on various causes of chronic diseases. When we change our lifestyle to bring it in harmony  with circadian rhythm, results are remarkable, irrespective of the food we consume. Changes in diet when combined with circadian rhythm harmony, leads to wonders. 
There is a protein called Melanopsin, discovered less than 20 years ago, which has a light sensing mechanism and it is present only in about 5,000 neurons of the eye. These neurons are hard wired to the master clock in the brain. Through these cells we perceive daylight and adjust our master lock in the brain. 
The time at which we consume food, plays a role more important than we would otherwise imagine. The food we eat in the morning is less likely to be converted into fat than the food consumed at night. Human body has over 30 trillion cells and these all work on a circadian clock which is maintained by the master clock in the brain. 
During human evolution, it was common to go in the morning in search of food. Men went hunting or scavenging and women and children went picking fruits and roots. Later, upon their return, the food was prepared and distributed. This was the main meal of the day called supper. During evening additional food was consumed before it got dark and at night people rested or gathered around fire before going to sleep. Such routine led to our body evolving to know that during day time energy will be required for activity so body keeps sugar as glycogen and stores it in the liver and muscles. During night after dark, body knows that there will not be any activity so it stores all unspent energy as fat. It just keeps enough stored in blood, liver and muscles to last through the night. Human brain consumes lot of energy (as glucose) even while resting and internal organs also need some energy to function. Together they need about 50 calories per hour. Liver is able to store about 300 calories and muscles about 700 calories. All extra calories are quickly converted into fat. 
The example I want to give here is that of a refrigerator and a deep freezer. It may not be very applicable for Indian households but you will get the point. 
The sugar in the blood is like food on the table, sugar stored in the liver and muscles is like food in the refrigerator to be consumed later but still easily available on demand. The energy stored in the fat cells is like a deep freezer; it is there for a rainy day or a famine when food is not available but it is not as easily available as glycogen in the liver. It would have to be converted into useable form (called Ketones); kind of like defrosting the frozen food. The food kept in the deep freezer is for future use, may be in a week or a month or even a year. Most deep freezers are kept in the basement out of site. Basements are generally not air conditioned and uncomfortable during extreme cold weathers. 
During day time our body is physically more active as a result it has evolved to keep more food in sugar form during daytime. All excess calories always get converted into fat as that is our way of storing energy for occasional periods of famine which were quite frequent thousands of years ago.
In today’s society we rarely experience famine.
Some of the findings suggest following;
1. Most people have 15 hour eating window. 
2. Less than 10% of the people eat within 12 hours or less. 
4. Small intervention studies have shown that (1) It is relatively easy to follow time restricted eating than calorie restricted eating. (2) Sleep quality improves. (3) Modest reduction in body weight. (4) Pre diabetics achieve normal sugar levels. (5) Improvements in Type2 diabetes. (6) Improvements in Blood Pressure. (7) Improvement in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). (😎 Accelerated recovery of cancer patients. (9) Improvements in endurance . 
5. The recommendation is to not eat any thing for 2 hours after waking up and do not eat anything for 3 hours before going to bed. 
The latest research published in 2017 has shown that meal timing and frequency are associated with changes in Body Mass Index. Please watch the linked video below. 👇
Circadian Code, Extending Longevity
https://youtu.be/wrP78K1objc
Why you should not eat in the evening?
https://youtu.be/_Q1Jc5euOoo
Eat more calories in the morning than in the evening. 
https://youtu.be/xxItwXUgMFE
