7.7 STROKE & CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES
 I have discussed how consumption of inflammatory foods causes atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis in arteries of the heart leads to heart attack. The same clogging of the blood vessels in the brain lead to stroke and other Cerebrovascular diseases. Stroke and other Cerebrovascular diseases are the fifth leading cause of death in the US. Cerebrovascular diseases include 
- Stroke
- Transient Ischemic Attack
- Aneurysm 
- Vascular Malfunction
The Cerebrovascular diseases are blockage of blood flow to certain parts of the brain. It’s leading cause is atherosclerosis. The blood vessels in the brain are very fine and when these get clogged the blood supply to that part of the brain reduces or stops. Also when a blood clot is formed or transported from other part of the body, the blood supply to that part of the brain stops causing brain cell damage. Depending upon the size of the blood vessel the damage can be to only a very tiny part of the brain or a larger part involving many more cells. These damages result in mini strokes which are often not noticeable or a major stroke. Tiny damages to cells affect memory resulting in vascular Dementia. 
Research has shown that the consumption of foods rich in nitrates produce nitric oxide which not only help blood flow, and reduce blood pressure but also reduce clogging or atherosclerosis of blood vessels. 
Green leafy vegetables and beetroots are the greatest source of nitrates in diet. In addition research has also shown that presence of sodium and potassium can hinder or enhance the release of nitric oxide. Where as Potassium increases the nitric oxide release, the sodium reduces nitric oxide release. One can therefore say that the ratio of potassium to sodium in the diet can affect cardiac and mental health. In olden days we used to consume ten times as much potassium then sodium because potassium is plentiful in fruits and vegetables but sodium is not. However in modern era we consume lot more sodium than potassium. Please watch the attached videos on the subject. 👇
Best Foods to reduce Stroke risk.
https://youtu.be/utRWFkjz-kw
Preventing Stroke with Diet.
https://youtu.be/Fs4r9HmJXFs
Preventing and treating Stroke and Hypertension with Diet
https://youtu.be/t3DMoHYX7pM
Food Antioxidants Stoke & Heart Disease
https://youtu.be/S4ummy46Mro
Stroke
https://youtu.be/pcmrgwNCPwM
