2.4 DIET & LIFESTYLE GUIDELINES 
As we discuss diet and lifestyle needed to cure chronic diseases, we must focus on bigger things first and foremost. The goal in this group is to improve the level of your health from where ever it is currently at, to an order of magnitude better. My focus is on making the instructions very simple and easy to remember. Once we reach our goal of getting off all medications, we will start paying attention to some finer details. This will take about 2 months for most people, depending upon your compliance. 
Following are my Daily Dozen recommendations for diet and lifestyle:
1. No animal food. No Sea food. No eggs,, dairy based milk, yogurt, cheese or other milk products. 
Nut based milk, yogurt and other products are fine. 
2. No refined or processed foods. No Ghee, Oil or Sugar. 
If you are not on any chronic medications, or do not wish to reverse the disease (just maintain it at current levels), two tsp. of ghee/oil and two tsp. of sugar maximum is allowed per day as exception. 
3. Eat from all five food groups: (1) fruits, (2) vegetables, (3) Beena & legumes (4) grains and (5) nuts & seeds. Herbs & spices are highly recommended and eat them regularly. 
As a rule of thumb consume one fifth of your daily caloric intake from each food group. It can be varied from day to day. If you want to lose weight faster than normal pace, eat only minimum recommended from the Nuts&Seeds group.
4. Eat a minimum of 1% of your body weight in fruits (must include berries) and 1% in vegetables (half in green leafy vegetables) each daily. Those who are trying to reverse diseases need to consume more.
5. To make sure that you are getting enough Omega-3: Eat 1 tbsp. Flaxseed (ground) and/or Chiaseed and five walnuts every day. If you are trying to reverse disease you can eat more. Eat as much variety as you can; try to include one Brazil nut each week and men must eat pumpkin seeds. 
6. Take vitamin B-12 supplement; 50-100 mcg daily or 2,000 mcg weekly. 
It is best to get Vitamin D-3 from sun. Take D3 supplement only if you are deficient and you don’t get in the sun much. Do not take any other supplements. 
7. Keep your body hydrated at all times. Drink minimum 1/2 liter warm water first thing in the morning. Rest of the day, eat your water,  as much as possible by consuming fresh fruits and vegetables rich in water. 
8. Practice 16:8 Intermittent Fasting daily. Slowly reduce your eating window to 8-10 hours. (To be discussed in detail later.)
9. Do therapeutic water only fast of 24 hours every two weeks and one 9 day fast or two 5 day fasts each year. For prolonged fasts you can have one 500 calorie meal each day before sunset. (Details to be discussed later)
10. Stay active. Walk 10,000 steps or more daily. Do some cardio, stretching and stress exercises also. 
11. Love your family and friends unconditionally and stay connected. 
12. Pray regularly and have a positive attitude full of gratitude. Who you pray to is not important, but that you pray is. 
No other restrictions. Eat variety of foods; everything you like and some of what you don’t like. Eat as much as you feel like but do not force yourself. No portion control is necessary.
••• No Animal Food? •••
I have noticed that in my health groups, after reading my diet & lifestyle guidelines, some people leave the group because they find it unacceptable to eliminate animal food and dairy from their diet. I have recently learned that some conservative Christians believe that God made animals as food for humans and not eating meat would be defying God. There might also be similar beliefs in other faiths. Also I have found that some Hindus believe that not having milk, yogurt and ghee would some how be insulting to mother cow and not following Lord Krishna’s footsteps. 
All I want to say to these people is to do the best they can. As mentioned in my guidelines, a sense of gratitude is very important and I have no desire to come between you and your God. 
Of the 14 guidelines only one restricts animal food. Even if you follow the other 13, you will see significant improvements in your health. Try to reduce animal food from your diet as much as you can without offending your God. 
Within animal food all highly processed foods like ham, bacon, sausage, pepperoni, salami, bologna, hotdogs etc. are recognized by the World Health Organization as Group 1 carcinogens (same category as smoking) so those should definitely be avoided. The least harmful among animal foods is fresh water fish like salmon, trout, tilapia, eel etc. or sardines.
Group-1 Carcinogens in Food - Is Consuming Processed Meet as Dangerous as Smoking?!
https://www.cfs.gov.hk/.../multimedia_pub_fsf_114_02.html
