9.1 CANCER INITIATION & PROMOTION
When we look at cancer we must understand that there are three separate issues involved. One is the initiation of cancer and second is promotion and the third is progression of cancer. 
It is widely believed that cancer initiation involves gene and DNA damage. There can be many causes of this damage such as 
1. Toxicity in the environment. The air we breathe. The water we drink. The radiation we are subjected to. 
2. Substance abuse: tobacco, alcohol, drugs and pharmaceuticals.
3. Health Conditions and diseases: chronic inflammation, different viral exposures etc. 
4. Food we eat. 
5. Genes we inherit from our parents. 
In today’s world it is impossible to avoid all these factors as a result it is widely recognized that over 99% of population living in the civilized society have tiny cancer cells floating around in our body fluids. As it is in the environment we can’t escape it. Our immune system is constantly killing these cancer cells and at the same time these cancer cells are multiplying. A sort of balance is maintained in each one of us. 
Still the question remains if all of us are facing same environment why only some of us get cancer and some don’t. The main reason for this is in the progression of cancer which I will discuss in my next post, however on the issue of initiation also there is a school of thought that lack of micro nutrients can be the cause of DNA and gene damage and thereby causing cancer initiation. 
Dr. Bruce  Nathan Ames of UC Berkeley, a leading authority in the field, has following views on the subject:
• Micronutrient Deficiency is likely to be a major cause of DNA damage.
• DNA damage is leading cause of Cancer initiation.
• Deficiency of Micro nutrients like Folic Acid, B-12, B-6, B-3, Vitamin C, E, Iron one  Zinc mimic radiation In damaging DNA. 
• Human body is only as strong as it’s weakest link. 
• It is estimated that over 60,000 sets of DNA are being damaged every day. 
• When we fail to repair the damage, we start aging, getting chronic inflammation and organ damage. This makes us more susceptible to disease. Micronutrients help keep DNA and genes stable and strong.
CANCER PROMOTION
Cancer promotion happens when the mutated genes receive the appropriate nutrition and multiply. Dr. Colin Campbell has demonstrated that for this promotion to occur animal protein is very important which is accompanied with IGF-1 hormone. His research has demonstrated that when animal protein is present in diet and the total protein in diet is excessive (over 10-11%) the cancer promotion takes place. In absence of animal protein these mutated genes can stay dormant. 
What is Cancer?
https://youtu.be/UopUxkeC4Ls
Animal Protein Turns on Cancer Gene
https://youtu.be/mguepudBoYA
Why Having Too Much Protein Can be a incredibly Harmful
https://youtu.be/OABNRYfSZIw
