6.12 GOVERNMENT & MEDIA
We have discussed how rich industries like Food, Pharma and Health Care influence the information that flows to us. Now let us talk about the Government and the Media. 
In government I am talking about both the elected politicians and the administrative officials. 
The politicians need money to win elections every 4-5 years and the money comes from rich industries so it is natural for them to support industry. This is achieved by the lobbyists working with the staff of politicians. 
The administrative officials are also looking for their future after retirement and there are plenty of cushy jobs available within these industries to absorb them post retirement. As a result most (not all) senior administrative officials are happy to oblige the the lobbyists. All they need is some science to support their actions and as we saw in my earlier posts, it is easily provided to them by the researchers who more likely than not were funded by the industry. 
Now let us look at the Educational institutions where bulk of the research is done. Just imagine you are applying for a PhD program at a leading university in USA, you need financial assistance. This assistance comes in the form of a research grant from, say, a soft drink manufacturer who is interested in undertaking a research to show that consumption of sugary sodas in moderation can be part of a balanced healthy  diet. 
The funding the company provides is on an annual basis. You opt to work on this project and by the end of one year you know if your conclusions are negative the research project may get cancelled and the funding may be terminated. You are careful in the choice of your words in the report you submit. The data we all know can be statistically manipulated to achieve the desired goal. No body has asked you to falsify the data and most likely you are not doing that (we will see later that even omitting some data can lead to false conclusions). So you prepare your report choosing your words carefully showing the affect of sugary soda in neutral enough fashion that it can be construed to be healthy. This research paper when published in a medical journal has a brief attached to it, because most doctors do not have time to read the whole paper so they only read the brief. The lobbyists are quite aware of that and they play a key role in choosing the words in the brief. 
MEDIA DISTORTION:
Now let us talk about the media or the medical journal. When journalists report on scientific studies, they do not fully dissect the scientific studies they’re reporting on. Press releases aren’t questioned. Facts get distorted. They remove the qualifiers and make the headlines sensational. And so the truth gets distorted. 
Any editor has multiple choices for the material for his next issue. He is free to chose any one of them. Now I want to explain that there is something called reprints of an article. If you like an article in a magazine say “TIME” and you want to get some reprints of that article, the magazine will be happy to provide those at a cost of something like 3-5 dollars each. The front page of the reprint will be the cover page of that issue of TIME but inside will be the article you have requested as reprint. It is a common practice. 
Now if you are the editor and you are debating about which of the multiple articles on health you should pick for the next issue and the lobbyist for the Dairy industry suggests that if you print the one mentioning that butter is good for health he would be interested in getting 400,000 reprints. (He wants those reprints to hand out to all the doctors in the US ). What would you do as the chief editor of the TIME magazine? You will choose that article. That is almost one million dollars of extra income for your magazine. Your personal compensation has a profit sharing component so you may see an extra bonus of 50,000 for that month. 
Please understand that in this whole example there is no conspiracy. No body is bribed. No body has broken any law. Every body’s conscience is clean but you the consumer is mislead. This happens all the time every day. 
A good example of how food industry influences politicians. 
https://youtu.be/ffUZfngcWPA
A good example of how sugar industry influenced WHO recommendation guidelines by putting pressure through US government to change them. https://youtu.be/6dmJpRfjvio
Here is the issue of TIME promoting eating butter, that I am referring to.
