8.8 SUGAR: THE BITTER TRUTH
“The last 50 years of nutrition information in America is a big fraud and that is why diabetes has continued to increase 
This is a statement by Dr. Robert Lustig who teaches medical students at University of California at San Francisco with reference to impact of refined sugar on Coronary Heart Diseases (CHD).
Dr. Lustig’s YouTube video “Sugar: The Bitter Truth” released in 2011 went viral with over 10million viewings. He collaborated with Katie Couric of CBS to make the documentary “Fed Up” in 2014, which I strongly recommend. 
When a sugar molecule binds to a fat or protein molecule, it is called glycation. When we roast food at high temperatures it turns reddish brown quickly. The same phenomenon (glycation) happens in our body at 98.6 degrees, slowly over long periods and leads to aging. When we eat sugar or fructose in refined form without the fibers it results in rapid glycation. The faster you brown the quicker you die. 
Sugar molecules when combined with oxygen produce energy and release an oxygen element which leads to oxidative stress. This oxygen element is neutralized by antioxidants in our food. 
The glucose structure is mostly in the ring form and thereby very stable but fructose structure has more linear form and therefore less stable. As a result the fructose gets glycated at a much more rapid rate (seven times more) than glucose. This is why processed foods and sugary sodas which use high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) to sweeten foods and drinks are more harmful than sugar. Added sugar is also harmful but sugar and fructosein natural food form are not harmful. 
Dr. Lustig’s main hypothesis is that sugar when consumed as added sugar (instead of natural sugar in food) is responsible for diabetes, high cholesterol and heart diseases. He demonstrates that the same amount of calories when consumed in sugary soda are responsible for 11 fold increase in diabetes. He also demonstrates that refined sugar and HFCS consumption is responsible for liver fat. 
Dr. Lustig explains that there are three metabolic syndromes
1. Subcutaneous Fat: this is the fat under the skin. This is called the “bucket” hypothesis meaning when we eat more than what we spend the extra calories are stored as fat. 
2. Visceral Fat: this a fat inside the body that surrounds the vital organs. When we are under stress and depression this results. 
3. Liver Fat: this is known as the non alcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Please watch the two videos linked below if you are interested in knowing more technical details. They both are rather long and not a required viewing.
Sugar: The Bitter Truth
https://youtu.be/dBnniua6-oM
