3.8 8-STAGES OF FASTING 
Every cell in the human body is genetically programmed for two main functions (1) self preservation and (2) procreation. 
During plenty of food (fed state), it is less worried about preservation and it is preoccupied with procreation. It is very similar to human behavior; which truly is just the composite of 30 trillion cell’s behavior. During shortage of food it’s focus shifts to preservation and it begins to recycle the waste protein sitting in it’s trash can (lysosome) and recycles it into amino acids (which are the building blocks of protein). During fasting, these behaviors become very apparent. The behavior is also experienced in other stress states which may not necessarily be due to lack of food. The following describes the various stages human body goes through while fasting. The gap in hours is only an approximation as actual would vary from individual to individual, depending upon their gut microbiome and content of the meals prior to fasting. 
(1) 10-14 Hrs: Ketosis starts as glycogen in the liver is exhausted, the metabolic pathway shifts to fat burning mode called Ketosis. During ketosis the fat from fat cells is released to provide fuel for the body, as liver converts these fat cells into ketone bodies to provide energy to the brain. 
(2) 14-24 Hrs: As ketone bodies level in the blood rises, it signals the body to ramp up stress busting pathways to reduce inflammation and repair DNA damage. Cravings go down, energy level goes up, mood and cognition improves.
(3) 24-36 Hrs: Autophagy (Intracellular): At 24 hours cells start recycling protein waste kept in a trash container inside every cell (called lysosome). Hunger hormone Ghrelin level goes down. Brain-derived neurotrophic factors (BDNF) go up making new brain cells. 
(4) 36-42 Hrs: Autophagy (Intercellular): As further time passes the body also begins to recycle damaged cells like senescent cells and misfolded proteins. Body also kills cancer cells and recycles nutrients. 
(5) 42-48 Hrs: Growth Hormones reach the highest levels (almost 5 times as high as before the fast). This is because hunger hormone Ghrelin promotes the growth hormone secretion.
(6) 48-60 Hrs: Insulin levels drop to the lowest point. The body becomes more insulin sensitive. Inflammation goes down. 
(7) 60-72 Hrs: Breakdown of old immune cells and generation  of new ones. Helps build cancer immunity. During this stage (as per Dr. Valter Longo of USC) cancer cells are weakened and more susceptible to chemotherapy while normal cells become more resistant to chemo therapy. 
(😎 Re Feeding  Stage: This stage is very important and often misunderstood. The refeeding should be done slowly and some suggest that food should be gradually increased to normal levels over a duration half as long as the fasting period. More research is needed in this area as human studies to date are quite limited. 
When human body is deprived of Autophagy by staying for ever in fed state, the neurons cells in the brain get damaged causing neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s and others. 
It is for these reasons the experts like Dr. Tasuku Honzo and Dr. James P. Allison recommend that one should do a 10 day prolonged fast each year. It does not have to be water only fast; one can eat one meal a day of under 500 calories. It helps if the meals are light on protein as protein deficiency is the main cause of therapeutic benefits. It so happens that there is a custom in many cultures to observe such fasts. Navratre among Hindus and Ramdan among Muslims. Unfortunately to avoid discomfort people have started making too many concessions and which negate the benefits of such fasts.
