1.16 BLUE ZONES
There is a religious group in US and Canada where they adhere strictly to the diet and lifestyle prescribed by their religion. The group is called “Seventh Day Adventist”. A large community of theirs lives in a Southern California City of Loma Linda now part of a northern suburb of Los Angeles. Their adherence to diet and lifestyle makes them an interesting subject for many research studies. The first major study on them was done in 1958 known as Adventist Mortality Study in which 22,940 California Adventist’s were studied. The timing of this study coincided with a large American Cancer Society’s study of non-Adventists. The study found much lower rates of cancer among the vegan Adventist’s. 
In the last 25 years many diet and health studies have been done on them. One such study which began in the '90s, was a detailed analysis of longevity and the factors in the religion's lifestyle that contributed to it. The study linked the increase in a longer life span to five simple habits: 
• no smoking, 
• keeping to a weight of below 25 BMI, 
• eating a plant-based diet, 
• eating nuts regularly and 
• regular physical activity.
The city of Loma Linda is one of the original 5 blue zones in the world as described by Dan Buettner in 2004, in a collaborative research with National Geographic. These original 5 Blue Zones were:
1. Okinawa, Japan
2. Sardinia, Italy
3. Icaria Greece
4. Nicoya, Costa Rica
5. Loma Linda, California 
• This research shows that most of the people who live the longest disease free life have following characteristics in common:
1. They eat predominantly plant based food. Animal food comprises less than 5% of their diet. In Dan’s words “it is not clear whether their longevity is because of small amount of fish and meat consumption or in spite of”.
2. They do not eat highly processed or refined food
3. They live a very active lifestyle doing lot of walking and many daily chores themselves
4. They live in close knit societies sharing social activities 
5. They live close to or with their extended families
6. They are spiritually inclined and have a very positive attitude
• During research they were asked the following life expectancy questionnaire:
1. Do you sleep at least 7 hrs a night
2. Are you physically active 1/2 hr a day
3. Do you eat 3 servings of vegetables a day
4. Do you belong to a faith
5. Do you have a minimum of 3 friend
6. Have you not smoked in last 5 years
7. Do you have a desire and capacity to live to age 90
8. Have you not had unprotected sex with a stranger
• Based on this research it was determined that If your current age is 50, your life expectancy, based on the number of yeses to the above questionnaire, would  be as following:
2 yes:  Male  75, Female  79
5 yes:  Male  82, Female  86
7yes:   Male  89, Female  93
• FOOD PREFERENCE: In Blue Zones the food in order of importance was as following:
1. Sweet potatoes
2. Tofu
3. Turmeric 
4. Grains
5. Greens
6. Beans
7. Nuts
• Another common factor was that they  all have a purpose in life.
I have written this post only to impress upon the point that we must shatter the myth that once we reach the old age of 80+, we must be resigned to live with  old age diseases. These diseases are only result of our indiscretions in younger life and a belief in the myth that everything in moderation is fine. 
The following article is from January 2020 issue of National Geographic and makes an interesting reading.👇
https://apple.news/Ajo7CpqhzTOuKKwv4jpMQIg
What the Longest Living People Eat Every Day
https://youtu.be/I4MjGC-XX90
