7.8 DEMENTIA & ALZHEIMER’S
Dementia is a generic name for diseases of the mind with cognitive issues. In US, after the age of 80, memory issues are the leading cause of disability. These vary in magnitude from “mild cognitive impairment”, which can start as early as 60s, to severe Dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Over 50% of the US population is affected by Alzheimer by the time they are 85. Though often described that way, Dementia is not a normal part of aging. Symptoms of dementia can change from person to person depending upon what part of the brain is affected. It is characterized by problems with:
* Thinking
* Language
* Memory
* Judgement
* Reasoning
Though dementia is a disease on a continuum, it is often described using a three stage or a seven stage model. Essentially, they represent mild, moderate and severe stages. In dementia, problems get in the way of how life was once lived. There are many biological causes of dementia. Dementia is a general overview term describing several different types of diseases. There are four main diseases that cause Dementia:
1. Frontotemporal Dementia
2. Dementia with Lewy Bodies
3. Vascular Dementia 
4. Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s Disease is the most common form of dementia. In Alzheimer’s Disease the part of the brain affected is Hippocampus. It is a type of dementia that causes problems with memory, navigation, thinking and behavior. 
In Alzheimer’s the nerve cells are damaged by the buildup of Amyloid and Tau as these proteins begin to clump together. Microscopic changes in the brain begin long before the first signs of memory loss. Neurons or nerve cells communicate with each other through neuron connectors. The space between these connectors is called synapse. The synapse is where neurotransmitters are released to make communication happen. Besides releasing amyloid transmitters into the synapse, neurons also release small amyloid called Amyloid Beta. Normally amyloid beta is cleared away metabolized by the janitor cells of our brain (cerebrospinal fluid) mostly during the sleep cycle. When these amyloid beta cells are not flushed out they accumulate and binds to themselves creating a plaque called amyloid plaque. This amyloid plaque is the root cause of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Amyloid plaques begins to accumulate by the time we reach the age 40. It is believed that it takes about 15-20 years of plaque accumulation before we reach a tipping point causing the clinical symptoms of the disease. 
The focus of the drug industry is to develop a drug that can keep the amyloid plaque from reaching the tipping point by venting, eliminating or reducing the amyloid plaque accumulation. 
There is also a genetic link and depending upon whether one parent or both have this gene, your chances of getting Alzheimer can be 3 to 15 times higher than general. However as I have repeatedly said that even though genes may load the gun, the trigger is always in your hands. 
If we can focus on things we can do in our 40s to avoid reaching that tipping point we can prevent Alzheimer’s. 
Many scientists believe poor sleep practices might actually be a predictor of Alzheimer’s. Sleep deprivation leads to accumulation of amyloid beta. 
As discussed in earlier posts in this group, every human cell needs nutrition which is supplied by the blood circulating through capillaries. Also each cell excretes waste which is collected by the lymphatic system and put back into the blood for excretion through urinary system. However the brain does not have lymphatic vessels and the process is accomplished during sleep when brain is flushed with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to clean the beta amyloid. When sleep cycle is not accomplished satisfactorily (sleep deprivation or sleep deficit) the amyloid beta accumulate. This accumulation of beta amyloid further affects the sleep cycle. Other factors associated with increased risk of Alzheimer’s are:
- Cardiovascular health
- High blood pressure
- Stroke
- Diabetes
- Obesity 
- Smoking
- High cholesterol 
Autopsy studies have shown that 80% of Alzheimer’s patients also had cardio vascular disease. 
There is also a direct correlation between the consumption of saturated and trans fats and memory disorders. When we consume inflammatory foods the atherosclerosis occurs throughout our blood circulatory system. Clogging of the blood vessels in the brain leads to mini strokes leading to Vascular Dementia. Unfortunately the medical science today believes that  Alzheimer’s can not be prevented, cured or even significantly slowed. 
Average brain has over 100 billion synapses. We gain and loose synapses all the time by a process called neuroplasticity. Every time we learn something new we are gaining new synapses. People who are educated and use their brain a lot have more cognitive reserve which helps them in avoiding Alzheimer’s inspite of amyloid accumulation because they have abundance and redundancy in neuroconnections. 
Building an Alzheimer’s resistant brain requires learning new things, making new friends and reading new books, but the most important factors are diet and lifestyle. Aerobic exercise has shown to decrease amyloid beta accumulation. The research has shown that PBWF/ IF diet and lifestyle can not only reduce your odds of getting memory diseases, it can reverse the disease and improve memory. 
Please watch the following videos on the subject.
The Alzheimer’s prevention diet.
https://youtu.be/CJETBuICiCc
Power foods for the brain.
https://youtu.be/v_ONFix_e4k
Brain healthy foods to fight Aging.
https://youtu.be/-x8Sx5LHDxI
Best brain foods: Greens and Beets put to the test.
https://youtu.be/4ZnZkpAufXU
The effects of Obesity on Dementia
https://youtu.be/tOUM6uMRpCw
