6.1 CHRONIC DISEASES 
Human body is a self healing organism. Under any conditions it knows what to do and adapt to the external conditions. We individuals create those conditions for the body by eating foods we eat, remaining physically active or inactive, the environment in which we live and the thoughts and emotions we carry in our mind and hearts. 
Health exists on a continuum (see the graph above) and we keep treading up and down on the straight line portion of that curve based upon our diet and lifestyle. 
Acute disease and chronic disease are two different things. Medical doctors are good in curing acute diseases but when it comes to chronic diseases they are a miserable failure and it is not all their fault. 
Chronic diseases don’t just happen overnight. They happen over time. The body initially adapts to diet it is being fed, the environment and the lifestyle and thereby masking their impact. Once it reaches a point when body can no longer mask it, the symptoms begin to show up. At that point we go to the doctor and the condition gets diagnosed as a disease. The doctor prescribed a medicine to alleviate the symptoms. By the time diagnoses is done, things have been going wrong for a long long time.
The modern medicine’s focus on relieving the symptoms by medication interferes with the body’s compensatory responses and often the situation worsens calling for more medications to  alleviate the adverse drug reactions and side effects of the first medication. This leads to a vicious circle and progressive ill health.
Many doctors are beginning to recognize this and voicing their concern. The giants in the plant based whole food movement have been saying this for over two decades. The recent focus on meta analysis, which involves analyzing the data of many separate studies as a whole, to draw conclusions, has been an eye opener. Many meta analysis have shown that aggressive control of symptoms by medication alone is more harmful than lenient control by diet. Aggressive intervention leads to death by causes other than the once being treated. This is called all cause mortality. For example many dietetics die of heart attack or BP patients die of strokes. The lenient guidelines on BP, recommended by the JNC-8 in 2014 and lenient A1C control for diabetics recommended by American College of Physicians (ACP) in March 2018 are two such examples. However due to negative impact on Doctors income and Pharma industries’ sales, these new guidelines are being restrained by other smaller organizations of specialists by coming out with their own conflicting guidelines and simply refusing to accept the recommendations of JNC-8 or ACP. Doctors in those specialized fields are quick to quote the specialized medical associations, to defend their practices of over medication. No body likes to loose patients it is bad for their business.
