3.6 NAVRATRE FAST
You all are already familiar with the benefits of intermittent fasting and why fasting for a period of over 14-16 hours is very healthy as it changes the metabolic pathway from sugar burning, to fat burning, leading to ketosis. So I will not go into detail of that in this post. 
Navratre fast achieves the best of intermittent fasting which is one meal a day ( OMAD) plan where the fasting window is 23 hours. 
Second and the main objective of extended periods of fasts like Navratre or Ramadan is to create a deficiency of protein in the body. When body experiences such stress, it looks for other sources of protein (amino acids, which are the building blocks of protein) within the body and recycles them into amino acids. The process is called  autophagy which literally means eating itself. When there is deficiency of protein in the body several things happen:
1. Each cell in the body keeps waste protein stored inside each cell in a sort of trash can called Lysosome. When body realizes that there is no more food coming or the food that is coming is deficient in protein, it recycles this waste protein into amino acids that are then used to make fresh proteins. This was the subject of research by Dr. Ohsimi Yoshinori that was awarded Nobel prize in 2016. 
2. All cells in the human body,  with only few exceptions, are always reproducing themselves, as old cells die. This is how our body rejuvenates itself. The time cycle of this reproduction varies for different parts of the body. For example the red cells in the blood die after 90 days and new cells are created. 
3. Some times some new cells created are deformed (misfolded proteins), these are not healthy as they do not perform the necessary functionality. When body experiences shortage of protein during fasts, it recycles these misfolded proteins into amino acids and uses those to make new healthy cells. 
4. There are also cells in the body that stop reproducing but they are not dead. They are called Senescent cells. Such cells rot and release chemicals which affect healthy sells around them. During fasting periods the body kills these senescent sells and recycles the protein in them to amino acids to be used for producing healthy cells. 
5. If there are cells in the body which are foreign to the body like cancer cells which are formed due to genetic mutation, during fasts the body kills these and recycles the protein to make healthy cells. Dr. Tasuku Honzo received 2018 Nobel prize for his work on this subject. This is called cancer immunotherapy. Based on this research medical community now recommended that every one should keep a prolonged fast once a year for 10 days. 
As you can see from the above discussion, there are many reasons behind various religious practices and we are only now beginning to appreciate the rationale behind them. One reason for consuming only fruits during such fasts is that, among all food groups, fruits are the lowest in protein. It is difficult to find foods which are low in protein. Contrary to what people believe most vegetables are very rich in protein. So if you are trying to ask yourself what should I consume, check the protein value of that food and seek out the foods lowest in protein. Apples are a good example at only 2% protein. 
I must mention here that keeping an unbroken water only fast for 9 days would of course be better but it would require medical supervision. (I do not recommend any water fast over 3 days without supervision). There are several clinics around the world, specially Russia and Germany, that specialize in such treatments and it is widely believed that prolonged fast is the ultimate cure of last resort. In absence of such clinical facility, Navratre fast is the best alternative as it combines the best of intermittent fasting and prolonged fasting. Also it is lot easier to keep than an unbroken water fast. 
HAPPY NAVRATRE TO ALL. 🌼
