4.4 PILLAR-4 PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
The fourth pillar of health is physical activity. An inactive lifestyle ranks as number five in terms of risk factors for death and number 6 in terms of risk factors for disability. Dietary risks and smoking are the top two factors for both these risks. The  diet is the 800 pound gorilla in the room when it comes to health but after diet and detoxification, physical activity is the third most important factor for good health. 
Exercise helps in areas such as mental health, cognitive health, sleep quality, cancer prevention, diabetes management, CVD, immune function, high blood pressure and lifespan extension. 
The question that follows is ideally how much should one exercise. The 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans issued by the US Government recommend only 150 minutes a week of moderate aerobic exercise which is actually down from previous recommendation which advised at least 30 minutes per day, by the Surgeon General. 
Often these advisories fall victim to a frame of mind that, “why advise some thing which would not be followed”. So they tone down their advice to what they think is achievable rather than informing us what the science says. It is also very common in issuance of dietary guidelines.
I will not dwell too much on this subject. Most of you are aware of importance of exercise. My goal is to cover some basic minimum activities and exercises essential for good health. 
1. Research shows that more you walk the lesser is your all cause mortality rate. Walking 90 minutes a day is better than walking 60 minutes a day which in turn is better than walking 30 minutes a day. Walking facilitates the flow of lymphatic fluids from our lymph nodes which are near our underarms and upper leg joints. 
2. The speed of walking is important from cardiac workout point of view. I recommend a pace of 110-130 steps per minute. The body should achieve a stress level of 85% of it’s maximum capacity for some duration during the day. The way to compute our maximum pulse capacity is to subtract our age from the number 220. That gives us the maximum pulse rate. So for a 70 year old the maximum pulse rate is 150. It should be once goal to achieve 85% of that maximum for at least 5 minutes twice daily. 
3. The third factor to consider is that we should not sit for long durations. The research has shown that sitting for long periods is almost as harmful as smoking. 
To cover the first three points I recommend five minutes of activity for every waking hour of the day. And two five minute sessions of cardiac workout where your pulse reaches the 85% of your capacity. That adds up to about 10,000 steps each day. The best way to monitor this is by using a Fitbit or Apple Watch. 
4. Besides walking, it is important to provide movements to our vertebrae to exercise those muscles which are holding the back in place. It is important to do some exercises for the back which cover all four types of movements:
- Forward and backward bend
- Sideways bend to left and right
- Twist in both directions
- Compression and extension
Yoga is the best way to exercise these movements. 
5. It is important for muscles and bone health, to do some stress training. This can be achieved by some basic exercises like: squats, pushups, pull-ups and sit-ups. 
6. Practice of Pranayama can go a long way in improving and maintaining health. The role of patterns of breathing in health recovery is only now being recognized in the western world as shown by the award of 2019 Nobel Prize in physiology to research that shows how human cells respond to different levels of oxygen. 
To summarize, the active lifestyle is key to good health and it is best to make a routine that can be followed regularly.
What will Happen to your Body if you Walk Every Day
https://youtu.be/3Ka7B3hCg08
0:14 / 3:25
(New Post)
4.3 SLEEP: Why It Matters?
Almost two out of three people in US don’t get sufficient sleep and it impacts their overall health in ways that we had not imagined earlier. One third of the people sleep 6 hours or less, which is double the rate from 50 years ago. It is recognized as a public health epidemic buy the Center for disease Control (CDC) and an estimated 60 million people in US suffer from chronic sleep disorder. Children are progressively getting less and less sleep per night as each year passes by. In past century they are getting 2 hours less sleep each night. One in five car crashes in US is the result of drowsy driving. Here are some of the things we now know about sleep. 
1. Brain accounts for only 2% of the body’s mass but consumes 25% of the energy. A mesh of blood vessels provides the nutrients and oxygen to every cell of the brain which also produces metabolic waste that needs to be removed regularly. Brain is filled with cerebral spinal fluid into which the cells excrete the waste like Beta Amyloids. This is flushed out during cycles of deep sleep and collected into lymphatic system. Improper sleep causes accumulation of these wastes which lead to diseases like dementia and Alzheimer’s. 
2. Besides removing toxins during sleep, brain also repairs and maintenance brain cells, prunes connections, transfers short term memory into long term memories. 
3. Sleep helps with integration of daily learning with prior experiences. Specially perceptual learnings. 
4. Sleep helps replenish energy sources. One of the sensors that tells us that the brain needs more sleep is located on the brain cells. As we use up the energy the brain cells have stored, this sensor builds up the residual part of spent energy called adenosine which gives signal of tiredness. This leads to involuntary transition from wake stage to sleep. This is very dangerous while driving. Some try to fight it by getting caffeine at this stage but it only acts as a temporary blocker of that signal. It does not prevent it. 
5. Lack of sleep affects our ability to concentrate, think logically and to remember. 
