8.9 METABOLIC SYNDROME
Metabolic Syndrome is a condition that represents one’s state of health based on five markers. These are :
1. Waist (abdomen) size more than half of one’s height. 
2. Blood pressure over 130/85.
3. Triglycerides over 150.
4. HDL cholesterol under 40.
5. Fasting glucose over 100.
When one has three of the above five conditions he is referred to as having Metabolic Syndrome. When one does not have any of these conditions, he is generally in good health. 
So far what I have said is well recognized and established. What is not recognized is that each of the above five conditions is caused by resistance to insulin. 
1. As fasting insulin levels rise the body mass index also rises. The presence of insulin restricts body from burning fat. Glucose is stored in the liver as Glycogen. In the presence of insulin in blood, Fructose absorbed from food combines with fatty acids to make triglycerides; which is stored in the fat cells. The reverse of this process is utilized when body runs out of glucose. However presence of insulin doesn’t allow this to happen and body is unable to burn fat. 
2. Insulin stimulates kidneys to retain salt which increases fluid volume in blood and thereby increasing BP.
3. Human liver can store glycogen only up-to 100 grams. After that liver goes through a process called De Novo Lipogenesis which means formation of new fat. Three molecules of fatty acids combine with one molecule of glucagon to form triglycerides. That increases the level of triglycerides in blood. 
4. Increase in triglycerides also leads to reduction in High Density Lipoproteins (HDLs).
5. Insulin resistance reduces body.’s ability to store sugar in muscle cells. This gives rise to higher sugar levels in blood. Which results in diabetes. 
So the main cause of metabolic syndrome is insulin insensitivity. 
Reduced sensitivity results from two causes; (1) over consumption of refined carbs and (2) prolonged consumption of carbs. Long eating window from 7:00 AM to 11:00PM of 16 hours keeps the presence of insulin in the body longer, making the body less sensitive to insulin.
Robert Lustig: What is Metabolic Syndrome anyway?
https://youtu.be/zx-QrilOoSM
