7.1 INFLAMMATION 
When our body gets hurt or injured or perceives injury it responds  by gushing blood to that part of the body. It increases the supply of white blood cells, immune cells and cytokines that help fight infection. 
Classic signs of inflammation are swelling, pain, heat, redness and loss of function. Hence the word inflammation.
When we say a particular food causes inflammation it means the body perceived that food to be a threat. 
Food after digestion and absorption flows in to the blood and as a result the blood vessel’s internal lining is the first to come in contact with the digested food. This lining is a single cell layer made of cells called Endothelial cells. The total surface area of these cells throughout the body (70,000 miles of blood vessels) is of the size of 6-8 tennis courts and is called Endothelium. Endothelium is the largest organ in the body. 
Now the question that comes to mind is why some foods are causing injury or are perceived to be causing injury. 
I want to bring your attention to the very first post where I had talked about the fact that human body evolved over 20 million years and it’s primary source of food was plant based. Consumption of milk, oil, sugar etc. are much more recent phenomena less than .1% of the evolutionary period. Animal food also is relatively recent (only after we became homo erectus). Contrary to what big food industry propagates, animal food comprised a very small portion of even paleo diet. The fossilized poop analysis shows that less than five percent of paleo diet was animal food. Also when we look at evolution even paleos were a recent phenomenon. 
There are also anatomical reasons to believe that human body evolved primarily as vegans. There is a whole science that deals with this subject focusing on human jaw bone, teeth and lengthy intestine structures. 
The science of nutrients is still evolving but one reason we have isolated, for the problems with animal protein, is that it is very high in a growth hormone called IGF-1 (insulin like growth factor-1). This hormone is directly linked to cancer tumor growth and many other chronic conditions. (I will cover this subject later under separate heading)
The inflammation generally goes away in few days as body heals. Something we all must have experienced having hurt our toe or knee or some other part of the body. The problem comes when we keep hurting the same part again and again, which is what happens to our Endothelium when we eat inflammatory food three times a day. 
The best way to heal inflammation is to first stop what is causing inflammation by stopping the inflammatory food and chemicals that we are ingesting. Secondly we must eat foods that are anti inflammatory. All animal foods including milk and eggs are inflammatory and all fruits and vegetables are anti inflammatory.
I should add here that some vegan foods are also inflammatory however they are mostly refined. Here are some examples:
- Refined sugar and therefore all foods that have added sugar. All soft drinks, all canned and most bottled juices etc. 
- Refined Oil and therefore all foods that have refined oils. Haldiram Namkins, potato chips etc. 
- White flour(Maida); so all foods made with maida are inflammatory eg. White pasta, pancake mix etc. 
- Hydrogenated oils like Dalda. They are the worst offenders, even worse than egg and meat. They have been banned in US.
Just disregard the fish part towards the end of the video because we prefer flaxseed and walnuts to get our Omega-3. 
https://youtu.be/x3zpVT14PxQ
