2.21 BEST WAY TO COOK
Now for the foods that need to be cooked their are various ways to cook them: 
1. Boiled
2. Steamed
3. Grilled
4. Microwave 
5. Baked
6. Air Fry
7. Stir fry
8. Deep fry
As far as the macronutrients (protein, carbs and fat) in the food are concerned they hold their food value very well when you cook them. It is the micro nutrients that we need to be concerned about. The two factors that affect the nutrient value of micronutrients in the food are the cooking  temperature and duration. 
It is widely believed that steamed food is better than boiled food but it is true only in the western context, where they remove the vegetables from the water after boiling. In Indian cooking the water is generally consumed as gravy and that makes the boiling the best way to cook. 
There is common misconception that spicy food is some how unhealthier than steamed food. This is a myth. All spices are very rich in antioxidants and should be consumed as a part of the food for better health and immunity. The problem only lies with ghee and oil which should not be consumed at all, or minimized. 
Microwave Cooking is believed by some to be unhealthy. The research does not support that view and it is as safe as baking. There are problems associated with reheating certain foods in microwave specially vegetables rich in nitrates like spinach. I will cover that separately. 
Baking exposes food to higher temperature and longer durations as well, so it is less desirable than boiling, steaming or stir frying. Baking is a good way to prepare whole grain breads. The good thing about stir frying and broiling is that it exposes food to high temperatures but for a very short duration.
Deep frying is clearly the unhealthiest way to cook and should be avoided. 
The following video by Dr. Greger covers this subject well. 👇
Best way to cook vegetables.
https://youtu.be/z1hqNPl-BWw
Best cooking method.
https://youtu.be/CblEnrysVIA
How to Cook Greens.
https://youtu.be/ydtK-MPyCig
Does Pressure cooking preserve nutrients?
https://youtu.be/NA7emq1WrBo
The dangers of baked potatoes 
https://youtu.be/Wk2JMT3EvA8
Lycopene benefits; Raw vs cooked tomatoes
https://youtu.be/yK-dSSmEwmQ
Toxins in raw mushrooms ?
https://youtu.be/10ildN-vCfc
