2.38 WHY SUGAR IS BAD?
Please watch this short clip before reading the post below.👇https://youtu.be/NkQ58I53mjk
• Liver Fat Explanation:
Please watch the video clip posted above, from an old comedy show titled “I Love Lucy”. In this video Lucy is working in an assembly line where chocolate candies are coming on a conveyer belt and her job is to wrap them in wrappers. She does fine when the speed of the conveyer belt is slow, but as the speed increases, she is not able to keep up the pace and starts storing the candies in places which were not intended for the candies.
Human liver works in a similar fashion. When our meal has sugar embedded in fibers it releases sugar to liver slowly. In the liver it metabolizes and some of it is converted to glycogen (to be stored in liver) and some into fat (triglycerides). This newly made fat is transported by the blood to subcutaneous fat cells under the skin, which is the right place to store fat in the body. 
When the food we consume is refined (deplete of fiber), it gets absorbed quickly and flows to the liver at a much higher pace. This doesn’t allow the liver the time to process it properly. (convert fructose into fat and put that fat back in the blood). The net result is that the fat spills over within the liver, where it did not belong. Kind of like in the Lucy’s video where candies land up getting stored in Lucy’s  dress, mouth and hat, instead of going further down the line to the storage boxes intended for them. This fat stored in the liver leads to what we now know as Non Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD). But even before symptoms of NAFLD show up, the body becomes insulin resistant. 
THIS IS THE LEADING CAUSE OF INSULIN RESISTANCE WHICH LEADS TO DIABETES.
By the way, the alcohol metabolizes in the liver in a similar way as fructose. Fatty liver is very common among people who consume alcohol. 
• SUGAR  METABOLISM:
When food is in our mouth being chewed, a signal goes to the pancreas that glucose is on its way so please release insulin. Insulin is the key that opens the lock in muscle cells to allow glucose to get in. When insulin levels are high the fat cells do not release fat into the blood. On the contrary they absorb fat circulating in the blood. 
Food has three types of sugar; Glucose, Fructose and Sucrose. 
Sucrose is a 50/50 combination of glucose and fructose molecules. Human body and brain run on glucose. Most of the glucose (about 80%) metabolizes throughout the body and passes through the liver untouched. But all of the fructose gets metabolized in the liver. 
When food is absorbed, it reaches the liver first. Liver is the chemical factory of the body and it decides what to do with the food. It can do one of the following::
1. Convert fructose in to glucose, if the glucose and insulin level in the blood are low. 
2. Convert fructose into fat, if the glucose and the insulin level in the blood are high. 
3. Convert glucose (remaining 20%) into glycogen and store it for later use if the glucose and insulin level in the blood are high. 
4. Convert fat into glucose and/or ketone bodies if the insulin level in the blood are low. 
• Visceral Fat Explanation:
The way human blood circulation system works is that heart pumps the freshly oxidized blood through arteries to every part of the body. As it moves further away the size of arteries diminishes, becoming very tiny capillaries. At the end point the blood opens up to provide the oxygen to all 30 trillion cells. Immediately at those end points the capillaries of the veins pick up the depleted blood (depleted in oxygen) and transports it back to heart. Now if the blood is excessively rich in fat (triglycerides), some fat gets spilled over. This leads to fat accumulating in other parts of the body near other organs like kidneys, pancreas, lungs etc. . called Visceral fat and in the muscles. This fat is very harmful as it interferes with the smooth functioning of these organs. The fat in muscles and the visceral  fat is also responsible for causing insulin resistance.
PS: ☝️To put things in perspective, I want to mention that at a blood glucose level of 120 mg/dl there is only one and a half teaspoon of sugar in all the blood (approx. 5 liter) a normal person has. So in absence of insulin’s action a cup of tea with one teaspoon of sugar is sufficient to increase blood glucose level from 120 to 200.
