
3.1 DETOXIFICATION 
Detoxification is the second pillar of health. First some discussion about the cellular structure of our body. 
Cells are fundamental building blocks of all organisms.The human body is made up of over 30 trillion cells. A cell consists of a cell membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm. The membrane separates the cytoplasm and nucleus from its external environment which contains the nutrients. After nutrients penetrate the cell membrane, they are metabolized and turned into energy that fuels the cell’s life functions. The by-products of this metabolic activity are waste that needs to be removed from the cell through the same cell membrane. Any impairment to a cells ability to let nutrients in or let the waste out leads to cell death by starvation or toxicity. (This concept in Yog is called Prana and Apana.)
As you can see from this discussion that detoxification is as important as nutrition. For good health it is not only necessary to 
(1) avoid absorption of toxins into our body by avoiding sources of toxins in our foods and environment, as listed earlier. 
(2) but also to engage in activities that facilitate their elimination. 
Clearly our goal should be to reduce the level of toxins we absorb and regularly engage in ways to detoxify our body. 
Food we consume is a major source of toxins. The other sources besides food are air we breathe, the water we drink (specially in India), the creams and lotions we apply to our body, the cleaning chemicals we apply to home surfaces etc. etc. The metabolic waste our body makes can also become toxic if not removed in timely fashion. This is excreted through breadth, perspiration, urination and defecation. 
There is a fluid in our body called Interstitial fluid (ISF)
that surrounds cells and tissues throughout the body. It is formed by extravasation of plasma from capillaries and modified by metabolic and other processes in the tissue. Body has a secondary circulatory system called lymphatic system which collects metabolic waste throughout the body and puts it back in to the returning blood in the veins. One can think of it as body’s sewer system. Body regularly detoxifies itself by consolidating waste and removing it through the processes of defecation, urination, sweating and breathing. In addition the body 
recognizes some toxins when consumed with food and it’s natural response is to vomit it or pass it through colon as loose motion.
There are many ways by which the detoxification process can be supplemented. The following list is an attempt to summarize various detoxification techniques.
1. Walking
2. Sleep
3. Water Therapy
4. Fasting
5. Yoga (Kriya) Techniques
6. Colon Irrigation
7. Pranayama
8. Yoga (Asanas)
1. WALKING
Walking is a very good way to detoxify our lymphatic system.  Lymphatic system does not have a pump like the blood circulating system. The only way it works is by the movement of the skeletal muscles. Lymph nodes are located are located at the joints where arms and legs attach to the body. That is why active lifestyle is very important. That explains the reason for my recommendation of 10,000 steps each day. It is also important to do some arm raises as a part of walking
2. SLEEP 
Sleeping every night is body’s way to detoxify brain. The Interstitial fluid in brain is called
CerebroSpinal Fluid (CSF) it acts as a sink for waste. During deep sleep stage this fluid flushes the brain and removes metabolic waste generated during daytime. These waste proteins like Beta-Amyloid, Tau etc. if not removed regularly, clump to form various plaques which result in diseases like Dementia, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and others. 
3. WATER THERAPY
There are several techniques of doing water therapy. 
(A) Drinking 2-3 glasses of warm water first thing every morning is a good detox habit. One can add lemon juice and/or ginger juice and/or Alovera extract/Amla extract or turmeric or apple cider vinegar to the water. 
(B) In Japanese Water therapy they recommend that one drinks one liter of water instead of 2-3 glasses. I do not know enough to recommend it but intuitively,  if at all, it should not be done more frequently than once a week.
(C) One of the Yoga techniques listed below as Dhoti (Varisara Dhoti aka. Shankhaprakshalana) is also a Water Therapy. 
4. FASTING
Fasting is an ancient practice common in various forms in many cultures. It is no coincidence that the two Nobel prizes in Physiology in recent  years (2016 and 2018) have gone to research on this subject. 
I advise everyone to keep a water fast every two weeks; it is called Ekadashi fast in Indian culture. In addition a 9-10 day prolonged fast (consuming only one 500 calorie meal a day) should be kept once a year. I also recommend strongly 16:8 intermittent fasting.  We will discuss more on this subject separately.  
5. YOGA KRIYAS
In ancient Indian Yoga practices they have prescribed six techniques for internal cleansing. These are collectively known as Shatkarmas and include following:
5.1 Dhauti
5.2 Basti
5.3 Neti 
5.4 Tratka 
5.5 Nauli
5.6 Kapalbhati
With the exception of Kapalbhati and  Neti all others should only be done under expert supervision.
6. COLON IRRIGATION
Here main goal is to clear the colon of large quantities of stagnant, supposedly toxic waste encrusted on colon walls. Doing so, would enhance the vitality of the body. It is also claimed that this improves the immune system. Two  of the Shatkarma techniques called Dhoti (Varisara) and Basti also achieves the same goal. 
7. NADISHODHAN PRANAYAM
Pranayam are the breathing techniques which help remove toxins. Amongst various techniques Nadishodhan specially is most effective and practicing it 15-20 minutes every morning can help the body tremendously. Kapalbhati another good technique, which is really a Kriya is listed under section 5.6.
8. YOGA ASANAS
Hath Yoga practice is a good way to detoxify our endocrine system. It also helps detoxify lymphatic system. 
