8.3 ACP REVISED GUIDELINES 
An example of how greed influences treatment of our chronic diseases is apparent from the way fasting blood glucose cutoff guidelines have changed over last 25 years. In 1997, the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus, established the cutoff point for diagnosing diabetes and it was lowered to fasting plasma glucose (FPG) of 126 mg per dl (7.0 mmole per L). Fasting glucose in the range 110-125 was classified as prediabetic (further lowered to 100-125 since). Prior to 1997 the cutoff for diabetes was 140. 
This one change doubled the number of diabetic patients overnight also doubling the income for diabetes doctors, endocrinologists and Pharma companies. 
Some  of the doctors that I consider as my teachers like Dr. John McDougall had questioned the efficacy of this move and had been fighting the ADA treatment guidelines. 
The American College of Physicians (ACP) which is a much larger forum of doctors than ADA (American Diabetes Association)  or AACE (American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists), finally conceded in March 2018 and recommended revised guidelines for treatment. However the doctor, most of you, who are diabetic, visit for your treatment is either a member of ADA or AACE, so it is easy for him to refute ACP recommendations by simply saying that they are not governed by those guidelines. 
This is a subject I have been pushing hard repeatedly in this group. 
I am attaching a link to an article that was published at two decades ago. I hope those of you who are still not convinced and unable to contradict your doctor will read this. 👇
https://www.acponline.org/.../acp-recommends-moderate...
Please pay attention to the chart below. It is the data behind the ACP guidelines. The research had shown as far back as 2009 that aggressive treatment of diabetes by conventional methods leads to higher all cause mortality.
The lowest all cause mortality is for A-1C in the range of 7.5 to 8.2. In fact the study had to be cut short by over one year because too many people on medication and insulin were dying.
