7.2 CARDIO VASCULAR DISEASE
Cardiovascular Disease is the leading cause of death globally, killing over 18 million people annually. Cardiovascular Disease is a generic name for following conditions:
1. Hypertension 
2. Coronary Artery Disease (Heart Disease).
3. Congestive Heart Failure
4. Stroke
5. Peripheral Artery Disease
6. Arrhythmia 
7. Cardiac Arrest
8. Congenital Heart Disease
Of these with the exception of the congenital heart disease, all others are caused by diet and lifestyle. The first five are caused by the plaque buildup in the blood vessel walls through a process called atherosclerosis. Cardiac arrest and Arrhythmia are caused by malfunctioning of electrical impulses. 
When coronary arteries get blocked not enough blood is available to heart muscles and the heart is not able to pump enough blood. This is called coronary artery disease. When the plaque ruptures and clogs the artery it is called heart attack. When heart stops beating altogether, it is called cardiac arrest. 
In my post on Hypertension I had discussed how once a child is weaned off mother’s milk, the inflammatory food he is fed, begins to cause atherosclerosis. Autopsy of many young soldiers during Vietnam war showed that the clogging of arteries was already quite advanced by the time they reached age 18. 
The internal lining of blood vessels is made of endothelial cells, and the total surface area of all 70,000 miles of blood vessels lining is over 6-8 tennis courts in size. Together this (internal lining) is called the endothelium, and constitutes the largest organ in the human body. 
Every cell in the body needs nutrition and oxygen, and this is provided, every second by the blood, pumped by the heart. These endothelial cells have a unique property of releasing Nitric oxide gas and this makes the blood flow smoothly through the blood vessels. When a plaque is formed on this surface, it reduces the area of nitric oxide release. As a result,  there is double whammy; not only the effective opening is reduced in size reducing blood flow, the surface available to release nitric oxide is reduced, increasing friction. So the reduced opening and higher friction makes the heart pump harder and reduces the blood supply. 
To cure this problem one needs to do two things:
1. Stop hurting the endothelium (atherosclerosis) more by stopping the consumption of inflammatory foods.
2. Increase consumption of anti inflammatory foods; specially those foods that release nitric oxide. All green leafy vegetables have nitrates in them which release nitric oxide. This helps by not only making blood flow smoother, it also removes the plaque already existing. This was first demonstrated by two doctors independently in 1980s; Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn of Cleveland heart clinic and Dr.Dean Ornish of UCSF. 
Dr. Esselstyn covers this subject well in the documentary “ Forks over Knives”. Out of 199 patients Dr. Esselstyn treated, 198 survived for many years and many are still alive today. All these patients were severely ill, with multiple heart events in the prior years. Except one (who did not follow the instructions) none had any heart event following dietary changes. Bill Clinton became his patient after going through a quadruple by-pass surgery in 2004 and three stents in 2008. He was advised another bypass surgery in 2010 but Dr. Dean Ornish, a personal friend of his, advised against it and asked him to follow Dr. Esselstyn’s program. 
It should be mentioned here,  that after many years of efforts, Dr. Dean Ornish succeeded  in persuading the medical insurance companies including Medicare (offered to all US senior citizens by the government) to agree to pay for diet and lifestyle change program for cardiovascular patients. His program includes yoga and meditation. 
Please watch the following videos on the subject. 👇
This was broadcast on CNN in October of 2012. This got me thinking about diet and lifestyle. https://youtu.be/gIWLdmb3SLs
How Not to Die from heat disease. 
https://youtu.be/LXigmGZk5FU
Padam Shree Dr. B.M.Hegde on Heart Disease and modern medicine. 
https://youtu.be/qIEg-y5MSj0
Acute Coronary Syndrome and Heart Attack
https://youtu.be/afYCN3Upy_w
Making Heart Attacks History: Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn 
https://youtu.be/EqKNfyUPzoU
Lifestyle Medicine with Drs. TamaraHoreich and Dean Ornish
https://youtu.be/PtLv6hRwAN4
