7.4 CHOLESTEROL 
We have known for a long time that  human body makes cholesterol and it is the body’s repair substance. Besides that, it plays many other key roles in human body and is needed to make every cell in our body. When we eat inflammatory food the internal lining of the blood vessels called endothelium is inflamed and cholesterol is applied to the wall as a repair mechanism. This is called Atherosclerosis. 
How much cholesterol our body makes is a function of how much cholesterol we are getting in our food and how much it needs; which in turn is a function of how much inflammatory food we are consuming. The more inflammatory food we consume the more atherosclerosis our body will experience requiring more cholesterol. If we eat food containing cholesterol, the body will make less. The whole idea of recommending food with lower levels of cholesterol was based on the fact that foods that have cholesterol happen to be inflammatory. The idea that we should take Statin drugs to lower cholesterol is flawed. Cholesterol should not be blamed, instead the inflammatory foods should bear the blame. It is a different matter that most inflammatory foods come with cholesterol. 
One way to explain this is to imagine you were a Martian researcher living on Mars, observing earth through a powerful telescope and you noticed that whenever and wherever there is a fire that flares up on earth there are lot of fireman with red hats. 
So you conclude that to stop the flares of fire on earth you must kill all the fireman on earth. If you as a Martian scientist succeeded in doing that the earthlings will start recruiting more and more fireman. The problem of fires flaring up will never get resolved.  
Now a look at how the industry has manipulated the cholesterol issue. 
There was a genetic disorder known since 1930s, which affected 1 in 500 people where the body produced too much cholesterol called Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH). There were some cholesterol lowering drugs that were already approved to treat this condition but as you can imagine, it was a very small market. In late 1970s and early 80s studies were beginning to show a strong correlation between high blood cholesterol and Cardio Vascular diseases (CVD) like heart attack and stroke. But, mind you, there wasn’t enough causation proof. Rich drug industries, through their lobbyists and with the help of American Medical Association (AMA), were able to convince the government (Food and Drug Administration) to approve Statin drug as a preventive measure for heart disease. This ensured that medical insurence companies would have to pay for it. 
In Nov. 1986 Merk sent the new drug application (NDA) to the U.S. FDA and Lovastatin was given FDA approval to become first commercial Statin Drug in September 1987. 
In 1998, the FDA placed a ban on the sale of dietary supplements derived from red yeast rice, which naturally contains lovastatin, arguing that products containing prescription agents require drug approval. (This is how governments manipulates what we can buy and what we can’t.)
Statin drugs today are the largest selling drug in the world with sales of over $800 Billion per annum. Study  after study have shown that of all people dying of Heart Attack, more than 2/3rd have normal cholesterol levels. Statin drugs do reduce cholesterol levels but do nothing to reduce the cause of heart attacks, which is Atherosclerosis. Studies have shown that total mortality was unchanged by Pravastatin as compared to placebo. On the contrary, there are some serious side effects which create other life threatening complications. Under intense pressure from the meat and poultry industries, in 2016, FDA changed the guidelines for consuming cholesterol rich food removing cholesterol as a substance of concern, (based on misleading studies funded by food industry) however nobody paid attention to the use of Statin drugs. One would expect that they would have also reversed the recommendation for giving Statin drugs as a preventive measure for Cardio Vascular Diseases. But nothing happened. FDA has remained silent on this issue. All the doctors are still prescribing Statin drugs. It is too big a business to challenge. FDA has no interest in challenging it. Those who have questioned it all along, are a very small group of activists like the PBWF doctors.
The NNT (numbers needed to treat) for statin drugs is 60 for heart attacks and 268 for stroke. This means that if 60 people take statin drugs one heart attack would be saved and if 268 people take statin drugs one stroke would be saved. The NNH (Numbers needed to harm) for statin drugs is 10 implying that every tenth person is harmed by the statin drugs. 
The choice is yours. When you change to WFPB your NNH reduces to zero. No body is harmed by switching over to WFPB. The NNT is also very low. It has not been researched as such but if you look at Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn’s results his NNT was 1. I quote below an article just to show how outrageous is the lobbying for Statin drugs:
“Almost all men over 60 and women over 75 should be taking the drugs, the research found. And more than a third of people between 30 and 84 should be allowed to do so.”
This is very dangerous specially considering that 
Statin drugs may be totally unnecessary. They do cause more harm than good and research has shown that they cause higher all cause mortality.
I urge all to understand well what I have been saying and do not fall into the trap of believing that by taking drug you are being safe than sorry. The facts point in the other direction.
I would encourage all users of Statin drugs to make some changes in their eating habits and get off these drugs ASAP. Just a simple habit of eating 1% of your body weight each, in vegetables and fruits every day will do the trick. There are some foods which help achieve it much faster like Aamla, beetroot and green leafy vegetables.please watch the linked videos on the subject. 👇
Optimum Cholesterol Level
https://youtu.be/lakaozfALho
Should you take a Statin Drug ?
https://youtu.be/3bjy58izaRQ
You don’t need Statin drugs.
https://youtu.be/7qTfRcHFSp4
Statin Muscle Toxicity
https://youtu.be/kdCBHoA3s1s
The Best Food for High Cholesterols
https://youtu.be/hNj6V7kIqGY
Amla vs Drugs for Cholesterol 
https://youtu.be/_QfhK6R14C4
Statin Cholesterols drugs and invasive breast cancer
https://youtu.be/f_rGl3U_ob0
