6.15 CURE VS CAUSE
Have you ever wondered why society is more concerned about finding cures than finding causes. The answer is very simple; there is no money to be made in finding the causes. As a result no money is available to fund the research in that area. In fact if cause is found it would negatively impact the business of food industry, Pharma industry and health care providers. 
1. The Pharma industry is interested in finding the cures because that is how they make money. This fact we all know very well but what we are not aware of is that Pharma industry is also interested in finding more diseases. As any MBA student knows when you want to grow a business you have two strategies: (1) find more applications for your current products as was done by the manufacturer of statin drug which initially was required by only 0.2 percent of the population who suffered from Familial Hypercholesterolemia.
2. Find new drugs for new diseases which currently do not exist. So they try to find conditions which are currently not ascribed as disease. This is what was done through the help of doctors to define high cholesterol (over 200) as a disease and get it approved as a disease by FDA. This approval in US is essential because only after such approval the insurance industry would pay for the drugs. The net result is that this drug is now about to become the first and the only trillion dollar drug. A trillion dollar drug that addresses a problem that did not exist till four decades ago. 
You will be surprised to learn that many drug companies are working on identifying cures for diseases that do not exist. These are secret projects and marketing campaigns to bring awareness to these diseases start way in advance. I have learned from a professor at Georgetown University, Dr. Adriane Fugh-Bergman, who researches such subjects, that it takes on average about 7 years to come up with a new drug and a new disease. Of course the Statin drugs to lower cholesterol (if above 200) in perfectly healthy people is the best example but there are other examples of diseases that earlier did not exit like Botox injections for under arm sweating, Premarin estrogen therapy for menopausal women or LowT therapy for men. Such marketing campaigns are very creative and first create an impression that some perfectly normal symptoms like sweaty underarms or sleepiness after heavy lunch might be caused by  certain deficiencies or abnormality. 
In 2016 during a symposium, I had an opportunity to meet with Dr. Fugh-Berman, who is the director of “Pharmed Out”, an organization created by Georgetown University Medical Center, which focuses on the marketing practices of Pharmaceutical Companies.
Dr. Fugh-Berman has published numerous studies which explore the relationship between physicians and the pharmaceutical industry, off-label promotion, ghostwritten articles, and invented diseases.
This organization had also created a portal where you could find out how much kickback your doctor is getting from the Pharma industry for prescribing statin drugs. Dr. Fugh-Bergman was also an expert witness in the Opiod lawsuit against 13 major pharmaceutical companies that recently got settled for over 8 billion dollars. She testified how “industry-generated narrative [became] conventional wisdom” and how sale of OxyContin made by Purdue Pharma jumped from $48 million in 1996 to over $3 billion in 2009. 
PBS News wrote that "these deadly consequences didn’t happen overnight". Fugh-Berman said that the industry used "pervasive marketing tactics" to "influence conversations" between "patients", "doctors, medical school students and instructors". The article said that "One tactic that opioid manufacturers used to protect sales was the rebranding of substance use disorder as pseudo addiction — that patients who took opioid medication and later developed symptoms of addiction should be treated with more opioids. According to the PBS News March 2019 article, even though "while fewer doctors are writing opioid prescriptions" than they did prior to the mid-2010s, Fugh-Berman said that "it is nowhere near a reasonable level." PBS said that even in 2019, "opioid marketing continues to lead doctors to guide patients toward the drugs."
Here are some slides from that talk by Dr. Fung-Berman which speak for themselves.
