2.50 Why No Dairy?
All mammals produce milk at the time of infant birth and nurse their infants for a short period that varies from species to species. The composition of the milk is commensurate with the growth rate of the specie’s infants. Duration of pregnancy varies among various mammals and ranges from 20 days in a mouse to 645 days for an African elephant. Cow is pregnant for 9 months. A new born calf weighs about 70 pounds and doubles its weight within 2  months and matures within 2 years to a weight of over 1,000 pounds. That is a 14 fold growth in 2 years. In comparison a human infant doubles his weight in 4-6 months and matures in 12-14 years. Due to these differences in growth rates the composition of cow’s milk is very different than human milk. It has higher levels of protein and fat. It also has higher levels of growth hormones like IGF-1 (Insulin like Growth Factor-1). This hormone promotes rapid growth. In addition the cows today are kept pregnant through artificial insemination and fed pesticide ridden food. They are also injected with synthetic growth hormones and antibiotics. As a result milk today is not the same as it used to be even hundred years ago. 
From evolutionary point of view dairy is a strange food for humans and till 10,000 years ago we did not domesticate animals and were unlikely to be consuming dairy. No other mammal consumes other specie’s milk and also no other mammal consumed milk after childhood. 
Milk may have served a purpose in older times when we faced periods of famine regularly and may have saved many communities from perishing. Even modern research has shown that milk when consumed in communities where there is shortage of food, can play a positive role but such cases are rare indeed in today’s civilized world. 
Here are various reasons why milk and other dairy products are unhealthy for humans.
1. There is no evidence that milk reduces bone fracture. In fact there is evidence that suggests otherwise. Countries like Africa which have lowest rate of milk consumption have lowest rate of osteoporosis. Whereas countries consuming maximum milk have highest rate of hip fractures. A 2003 Harvard nurses study of 70,000 women for 18 years demonstrated that there was no protective effect on bone health among dairy consumers. 
2. Dairy consumption increases body’s level of IGF-1 hormone and estrogens which are known cancer promoters and implicated with prostate and breast cancer risks. 
3. According to a 2006 study of Harvard researchers, in a study of 10,000 women aged 26-46, participants who consumed most dairy products were at higher risk of breast cancer. Another 2014 study has shown that milk and dairy products consumption increases the risk of breast, lung and ovarian cancer. 
4. Additional growth hormones (synthetic Bovine hormones) injected in cows to increase milk production interfere with normal hormone functions in human body. 
5. Milk is one of the largest sources of dioxins which can affect the central nervous, immune and reproductive systems of the human body. 
6. Milk and cheese can cause acne. 
7. Dairy is full of saturated fat which is implicated in cardio vascular diseases. 
8. Dairy aggravates Irritable Bowl Syndrome. 
9. Dairy is a cause of auto immune diseases like arthritis.
10. Three fourth of the world population is lactose intolerant and genetically unable to properly digest milk. In most children after the age of five, the enzymes that help digest lactose decline, making them lactose intolerant. 
11. Dairy consumption in childhood is a leading cause of Type-1 diabetes. 
12. Dairy is also implicated in chronic constipation. 
13. Other problems associated with dairy are allergies and sinus issues. 
14. Milk can also increase men’s risk of having Parkinson’s disease. The main reason for this is that cows milk is contaminated with pesticides which cows consume with their grain fed diet. 
Here are some additional points that support my view against dairy. 
* Many of my health group members have reported curing asthma, nasal congestion, seasonal allergies, digestive problems, constipation, and  even headaches after giving up dairy. 
* Dr. Neil Bernard had filed a lawsuit against US government’s campaign “Milk Does the Body Good” and he won. The advertisements had to be stopped by court order. 
* US government has been recommending 3 glasses of milk a day in it’s dietary guidelines but these guidelines are politically biased and not based on science. Head of nutrition at Harvard school of public health is one of the most vocal critic of these guidelines and has called them “utterly ridiculous”.
* If one must consume some dairy, the least harmful products are ghee, buttermilk, yogurt and kefir. One must find organic sources which are RBST growth hormone free. This hormone is banned in Europe, Canada, Japan, Argentina and Australia.
