6.10 FUNDING & BIAS IN RESEARCH
We like to believe that all medical research that is published is truly objective. But what if it is not so. There are several factors, that come in play, in how research findings are arrived at, interpreted, summarized and published. Some of these are:
1. Who is funding the research?
2. Who is conducting the research?
3. Statistical Methods used to interpret the research. 
4. Who is printing the research?
 A bias gets introduced in research at every stage. In next few posts we will see examples of these.
•FUNDING of RESEARCH
Till few decades ago most of the research was funded by government organizations like National Institute of Health (NIH) or the leading universities like Harvard, Stanford, etc.. This is no longer the case. The research costs money and the government and universities are are running out of funds. The money is with the Food and Pharma industries and they are now funding the universities and the research. 
Food industry has increased its funding of research from 41% in year 2001 to 92% in year 2013. The following quotes are from  Dr. Laura Schmidt, a professor at UCSF. 
“There is lot of confusion and misinformation out there. We know from scientific reviews that there is tremendous bias in the research through the funding conflict of interest. Studies, where investigators are funded by the industry to study the relationship between sugar and obesity are five times more likely to report that there are no problems with sugar and obesity.”
“We have evidence that studies funded by the (beverage) industry have a higher probability of coming out with industry friendly findings.”
PUBLICATION BIAS IN MEDICAL RESEARCH
When we conduct medical research, the negative findings generally do not get published. Only positive findings do get published. This distorts the true picture because flukes do happen and because they get published we start believing in them. In March 2012 a leading journal called “Nature” reported that when they tried to replicate 53 different basic science studies looking at potential treatment targets in cancer, they were able to successfully replicate only six. The remaining 47 were unreplicable. 
To give one example; of all FDA trials for 12 antidepressants, 38 had positive results and 36 had negative results. However only 3 of the negative trials were published but all but one of the positive trials were published. Making the drug look very attractive. You can clearly see the staggering difference between reality and perceptions created by those peer reviewed academic literature. The public and the doctors were misled. This is the systematic flaw in the core of medicine. 
This is a disaster because doctors can not know the true effect of medicines they are prescribing. 
The solution is easy but there is no will on the part of the government or the Pharma industry. What is needed is to publish all trials in human, including older trials, for all drugs in current use. 
Please watch the video on the subject linked below.👇
What Doctors don’t know about the Drug they prescribe. 
https://youtu.be/RKmxL8VYy0M
