2.18 GREEN JUICING
I had discussed in the dietary guidelines that we need to consume a minimum 1% of our body weight in vegetables and half of that in green leafy vegetables. In fact Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn recommends 6 servings of green leafy vegetables each day to all his heart patients including Bill Clinton. 
We Indians don’t know how to eat these leafy vegetables without adding ghee or oil. It is for this reason I recommend juicing them and adding some other essential ingredients to make juice both healthier and palatable. 
I do want to make it very clear that juicing is only the second best option to eating greens as raw or boiled. 
In the two documentaries on juicing you must of observed how by going on a juicing diet, people were able to loose weight, lower blood pressure, glucose and cholesterol and get off all or most medications. What they did was rather drastic. 60 day juice fast in “Fat Sick and Nearly Dead” and 30 day juice fast in “Super Juice Me”. After seeing the first documentary I ordered my juicer the same day and started green juicing. We did only five day juice fast to kick off our dietary changes. The results were remarkable. That was 7 years ago but what I have learned since then is an even more miraculous method that on the surface appears draconian but is supported by the research that has won two Nobel prizes (2016 and 2018) in physiology. 
In this approach the juice is replaced with water. (More on this later)
The main goal is to consume large quantities of green leafy vegetables (fruits should be eaten as a whole or to just make vegetable juice tastier). Juicing makes it easy. Think of juice recipe as comprising of three groups. 
-The first group is " Granny Smith (or any other juicing apples) apples(4), lemon(2) and ginger(2 thumb size pcs.)
-The second group is " Celery (one bunch), cucumber (one large English or two medium regular) and/or lettuce )
-The third group is any of the following green leafy vegetables like kale, chard, spinach, mustard greens, turnip greens, collard greens, beet root greens, cabbage etc. (2 bunches)
The third group can also be replaced with carrots and beetroots.
You want to start with a juice fast for 3 to 5 days at least. The longer the better. You will be drinking only juice for these days. Try four to five glasses (10-12 ounces ) per day or more if you wish. 
After that continue with three glasses per day; 20 minutes before each meal till you are off all medications. After that one or two glasses a day is sufficient. 
The two juicers I recommend are Angel 5500 and Green Star. These are cold pressed juicers. For India Hurom is a good choice. Others may also be good. I just do not know about them.
A better quality juicer gives you better yield and you recover the extra costs within the first year.
You can go to Utube and type in green juicers. You will get lot of videos comparing different brands. Angel juicer costs around $1,400, Greenstar around $ 500. These are not available in India. A good juicer in India will cost around Rs. 20,000.
The best blender on the market is Vitamix but it is not good for juicing. 
* Juice vs. Smoothy
There is a difference between smoothies and juice. 
- The problem with smoothies is that they have lot of air mixed in the juice as a result it doesn’t have shelf life and you must make it fresh every time. 
- Smoothies make one feel bloated after drinking because one is consuming air along with the juice and fiber. 
- Smoothies stay in the stomach for a few hours of digestive cycle. Clear juice passes through in minutes and nutrients get absorbed into blood within minutes thereby reaching every nook and cranny of the body. 
Juice prepared in slow speed juicers does not have these problems and can be stored in refrigerator for upto 3 days easily. That makes it easy for busy folks, as you only need to make it twice a week. 
A question often asked is “ aren’t you removing fiber in juicing?” The answer is that there are two types of fiber soluble and insoluble. Juicing preserves all the soluble fiber and some of the insoluble fiber as well. 
One should eat fruits as a whole and juice only vegetables. You can add some fruit to enhance the taste and yes Granny Smith apples because they have enzymes that help digest green leafy vegetables.
* Fresh vs. Frozen 
It is always better to eat fresh tree ripened fruits and vegetables. However this debate is not as simple as it appears. Fresh fruits and vegetables are often picked before they reach their peak in terms of ripeness and nutrients to allow for shipping time. Frozen foods are picked at their peak and frozen immediately.In the absence of fresh produce frozen is a satisfactory option.
* Organic vs. Non-Organic
The other question that arises is that if organic produce is not available, should one skip it or eat it any way. 
•Barring some cases of extreme foul play, most vegetable even if they are not organic are better to eat than not eat at all. Wash them well and feel free to peel if you are overly concerned. You  can also use a brush to wash them better. 
I do not know much about Indian conditions but there is a list called dirty dozen which lists 12 produce items which you should seek out in organic versions. 
It is a good idea to strain the juice through a fine sieve. 
Most people would see improvement in their bowl movement after going on a PBWF diet. It is not uncommon to have multiple bowl movements each day. Some people do experience loose motions initially. Situation mostly stabilized to a new normal routine. 
There is a saying: First thing in the morning, if you poop before you finish peeing; you are in good health.You soon will experience that.
👇 A typical green juice mixture. From left to right:
1. Chard
2. Kale
3. Arugula 
4. Lauki
5. Romaine lettuce 
6. Celery
7. Cucumber 
8. Lemon
9. Ginger
10. Beetroot
11. Raw Turmeric root
12. Green apple
13. Carrot
