7.5 LDL Increase During Weight Loss
It is advisable to loose weight slowly and sustainably. When you practice PBWF/IF/10K diet and lifestyle, overweight people loose weight automatically without any portion control. Generally it amounts to loosing 1-2 pounds per week. In the beginning one looses additional weight, due to two reasons:
1. The food in transit, in your Gastrointestinal tract reduces, when we change over to plant based whole food. This is because PBWF, as against animal and processed foods, takes less time to digest and absorbed as it travel through stomach, intestines and colon. 
2. The PBWF has lower salt content, compared to animal and processed foods. This lowers the retention of water in the blood. 
These two factors can reduce one’s weight, anywhere from 3-7 pounds within days, even if there is no fat loss. So it is not uncommon to experience a weight loss of 7-16 pounds in the first month. 
It is possible to loose weight faster by additional fasting, portion control or additional exercising. I do not recommend any such drastic measures unless you are trying to fit into your grandmothers wedding gown. 
When we loose weight, we burn fat that has accumulated over many years. The composition of that fat is based on your dietary habits in the past. The skin of all fat cells is made of cholesterol and when these cells shrink, they not only release triglycerides but also some cholesterol. Triglycerides get burned to release energy but cholesterol does not burn. It goes to liver and gets converted into Bile and sent to gall bladder. As a result, it is not uncommon for people to experience an increase in bad LDL cholesterol under such scenarios. This is what some in my health groups who have lost lot of weight quickly have experienced. One should not be alarmed by this, as it is only temporary and once weight stabilizes bad cholesterol also comes down to reflect your new improved diet and lifestyle. 
Another impact of rapid weight loss can also be development of gall stones. Gall stones are nothing but super saturated cholesterol crystals. 
In the following video disregard the reference to low carb. Focus on weight loss part only. 👇
Reason for LDL Increase on Low Carb Diet
https://youtu.be/MNfjkTyBUdQ
