5.2 SPIRITUAL  HEALTH
Human pursuit to know the nature of things has been eternal. Some 2,500 years ago this hunt for knowledge split into two disciplines philosophy and science. India was the richest country at the time and Takshshila was the worlds largest university, with scholars coming from all over the world.  Credit given to Thales of Miletus as father of modern science may only be due to western bias, or 1,000 years of oppression by invading cultures. In any case it is interesting to note the convergence of modern science and Indian philosophy after 2,500 years. This subject was well covered by Fritzof Capra in his 1975 book “The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels Between Modern Physics and Eastern Mysticism”.
I recommend it strongly. 
On matters of health and psychology medical science is still trying to catch up to Ayurveda and teachings of Upanishads and Geeta. If it wasn’t for greed of Food, Pharma and Health Care industries, we may have seen the light many decades ago. 
The power of prayer has also now been accepted widely in the scientific community. THAT YOU PRAY IS IMPORTANT, WHO YOU PRAY TO IS IRRELEVANT. What is important is that your mind should get flooded with a sense of reverence and gratitude. Feelings of gratitude triggers Oxytocin as a result blood pressure decreases and immune system becomes stronger and healing processes in the body speed up. 
I will use my favorite couplet from Sant Kabir to make my point. 
“Dukh me sumiran sab karen, Sukh me karen na koi , 
Jo sukh me sumirun kare, so dukh kahe ko hoi.”
This verse is often misunderstood because we attribute sukh to material gain and people get unhappy when that material gains they were praying for, are not realized. We often forget that we seek material gain only because we think, those will give us happiness and absence of those  will lead to unhappiness. Happiness is our true goal that we are seeking. When we pray in true spirit seeking nothing but happiness it comes to us naturally. It is like that five year old who runs feverishly to catch a butterfly, but it escape him and when he sits down tired, the butterfly comes and sits on his hand. My two penny worth of suggestion is that while praying never ask for material gains; simply ask that results (outcomes) lead you to the path of happiness. Or if you are blessing someone, bless that they find happiness in what the life has in store for them. Do not say that your wishes may come true, because in their ignorance, instead of wishing for happiness and contentment in life, they may be wishing for material gain which may or may not come true. 
When we pray with a sense of gratitude Oxytocin hormone is released in our body, which gives us happiness and that acts as positive feedback loop, which encourages us to pursue that path even more strongly. 
When we change our diet to PBWF and start Intermittent Fasting and walking 10K steps, changes happen, not only in our body but our psyche also. 
Plant based whole food is what Krishna refers to as Satvic in Geeta. Satvic foods brings forth satvic thoughts in our mind. Satvic thoughts are positive thoughts and promote happiness by releasing happiness hormones. 
When we engage in action, for the sake of action, and with no desire attached to the outcome, the process of acting becomes joyful (because anxiety is not there). Whether we reach the target or not, becomes secondary. When our sole focus is on achieving the target, and the target is missed we feel disappointed and miserable. That unhappy feeling affects our health negatively. This is the crux of whole Geeta teachings as beautifully summarized in verse 2:47.
“कर्मण्ये वाधिका रस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन। 
मा कर्म फल हेतु र्भूर्मा ते सङ्गोऽस्त्व कर्मणि॥
Karmanye vadhika raste, Ma phaleshu kadachana,
Ma karma phala hetur bhurma te sangotsva karmani”
“You have a right to work only, but never to any results thereof (fruits of action). You should never be motivated by the results of your actions, nor should you be attached to inaction (laziness).”
When it comes to our children we often advise “Enjoy the game and play your best, it doesn’t matter whether you win or loose”. But in our own life we totally forget it. 
Let me end here. This post is already getting too long as this is my favorite topic. (Health is only my second favorite.) Next week we will start focusing on Chronic Diseases and the Politics of health. 
Please watch the linked video summarizing some of the studies on meditation.👇
7 Shoking Benefits of Daily Meditation
https://youtu.be/D0-VmFNXmwI
