2.37 WHY IS OIL BAD?
A persistent question, that keeps popping up, is why oil is bad. Specially when I say that fats in natural plant based whole foods are not bad. In my post “Fat: Yes but No Oils”, I covered it only partially. I also realized that most videos on the subject do not make it very simple to understand. In this post, I will attempt to explain “WHY” part of this puzzle in more detail. 
Let me preface it by first repeating what I had mentioned in the very beginning. We humans evolved over millions of years consuming what grew around us naturally. As a result our body evolved to digest that food well and absorb it. When we process and refine this natural food it’s composition changes and the body needs to adjust and compensate for it. The manners  in which it compensates, lead to other affects which become cause of chronic illnesses. Here are the 10 leading reasons why oil is unhealthy:
1. Consumption of oil (where fiber, in which it was embedded, has already been removed) increases triglycerides levels quickly in the blood and makes it more viscous. This requires heart to pump harder and blood pressure increases. Higher BP has many negative effects on the body as we have discussed separately. This higher BP is not the same thing as the one caused by atherosclerosis which was discussed in the post on Hypertension (refer post 7.3) This higher BP is only for a few hours while your body is trying to get rid of the triglycerides by putting them into your subcutaneous fat cells under the skin. But during those few  hrs the high BP is doing its job of harming your kidneys and other harms to capillaries throughout the body like the brain, lungs etc. If you were to just have one oily meal and be done with it, not much harm is done. But if you are having three oily meals a day and snacks in between, and day after day, this harm becomes chronic. 
2. High levels of triglycerides in blood become more problematic when there is sugar also in the diet. When blood insulin levels are high (as would be the case if diet included sugar), the fructose  part of sugar, gets converted into triglycerides in the liver and it spills over  into liver and muscle cells. Fat spillover into liver causes Non Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD).
3. Fat spillover in muscles causes insulin resistance by depositing intramayocellular lipids, which are deposit of tiny fat cells in muscles. This makes it difficult for insulin to do its job of depositing glucose into muscle cells. As a result more insulin is released by the pancreas to do the same job. This increases the level of insulin in the blood. This is called insulin resistance. This is the precursor to diabetes, also known as pre-pre-diabetes. (Please refer to my post 8.2 Type-2 Diabetes)
4. Most cooking oils have disproportionately high amounts of omega-6 compared to to omega-3. Omega-6 is inflammatory (whereas omega-3 is anti inflammatory) and it changes cellular function. Fat becomes more reactive to oxygen, causing oxidative stress. (Please refer to my post 2.28 Antioxidants: Herbs & Spices) and bad for cardio vascular system. This is what we call atherosclerosis. (refer post 7.1). Atherosclerosis leads to heart disease, Alzheimer’s and ED. 
5. Saturated fat in oils increases LDL cholesterol level. Your body makes as much cholesterol as it needs. If you have high inflammation (as in 4 above), it needs to make more; because cholesterol is used to heal the inflammation. Thus a higher level in blood.
6. Oil is bad for blood vessel’s endothelial function. It interferes with the endothelial cell’s (which make the internal lining of the blood vessels) ability to release nitric oxide which is important for smooth flow of the blood. 
7. Saturated fats in oils directly clog arteries and can cause stroke and heart attack in people who are already suffering from atherosclerosis.
8. Highly refined oil damages the tight junctions between epithelial cells which make the lining of our G-I track wall. This leaves it vulnerable to leaky gut syndrome. (Refer to my post 10.10 Leaky Gut Syndrome) Leaky gut leads to many autoimmune diseases including arthritis. 
9. Oily foods can cause asthma patients more discomfort. 
10. Although in US, FDA has banned all hydrogenated trans fats (also known as vegetable shortening or Dalda) effective June 2018, it may still be sold in other countries including India. Presence of Trans fats in some oils is extremely harmful as it increases bad cholesterol and lowers good cholesterol leading to cardio vascular diseases. (Refer to my post 3.4 GRAS and Crisco)
As you can see above, oil increases risk factors for many different diseases besides cardio vascular diseases for which it is widely acknowledged, including diabetes, stroke, liver disease, asthma and arthritis.
Clearly the worst culprits are:
1. Hydrogenated Oils.
2. Oils with disproportionately high omega-6 to omega-3 ratio.
3. Oils rich in saturated fat.
4. Highly refined oils that have been subject to exposure to high temperatures, inorganic chemicals and in some cases genetically modified crops as in case of Canola oil. Such oils become devoid of antioxidants found in cold press oils. 
So the question now becomes how about oils which do not fall into above categories such as cold pressed oils rich in omega-3. These would include 
- Mustard oil (480 degrees)
- Walnut oil (320 degrees)
- Flaxseed oil (225 degrees) 
The smoke points mentioned in parenthesis show that mustard oil is the best choice for cooking. 
For non cooking use of oil for salad dressings or accompaniment to extra dry breads (baked without oil or butter) you can use flaxseed or walnut oil. Olive oil has a very undesirable Omega-6 to omega-3 ratio of 13 and therefore should be avoided. 
Never consume any oil simply because you think they are good for health as olive oil industry tries to market. Consume them only as exception to satisfy your taste.
