2.26 VITAMINS & SUPPLEMENTS
When we go through life growing up and eating with our parents on the same dining table, we develop a pattern of eating certain foods and avoiding others. This reduced diversity causes certain deficiencies. The body is good in handling excesses than deficiencies. Just because you eat certain nutrients in excess doesn’t mean body will absorb them, but if there is a deficiency the body suffers. However as all individuals are epigenetically very different we respond differently to deficiencies and all do not experience same symptoms with some exceptions. Seven decades ago we experienced diseases of deficiency like Scurvy (vitamin C deficiency) and Rickets (vitamin D deficiency) but now these are rare in developed world where food is sufficient. However we suffer from a mentality that more is better and it has made supplement use, more widespread. 
Recommending a therapy to otherwise healthy person should require highest level of evidence but opposite has been the case when it comes to supplements. Many recommendations are based purely on observational studies. 
 Making up for these deficiencies with inorganic (or even organic supplements) is not a good idea. This is because nutrients behave in complex ways with other nutrients. Reducing them to a single nutrient at a time and consuming does not replicate those processes. 
Vitamins & Supplements industry in US is 36 billion dollars strong and irony is that it causes more harm than good. Many recommendations for supplements were based on 
observational studies which are misleading because health conscious people take more supplements and they are healthier not because of supplements but simply because they are more health conscious. In recent years as more and more supplements have been put to a rigor of double blind studies the findings have been contrary to expectations as we will see. 
Vitamins & Supplements industry wants to keep growing and so they are always funding studies to create a confusion and doubt in your mind that you might be deficient in one nutrient or the other. It is true that organized single crop farming has depleted the soil of certain nutrients. When we use inorganic fertilizers, the focus is only on few key nutrients like Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium. This depletes the trace minerals in the soil and the food it produces. When we use the compost made of human waste these trace minerals are recycled back into soil. The ashes collected after cremation are thrown in the rivers which fertilize soil down stream. The occasional floods bring fresh supply of minerals to the soil. 
This is one reason why organic food grown using compost is richer in trace minerals (besides of course the absence of pesticides). This also is the reason why food grown in wild is much healthier like wild berries. 
There are several problems with the concept of taking supplements:
1. All supplements consumed first have to go through liver , which is the chemical factory in our body. They get metabolized there and filtered through kidney. This increases load on these vital organs reducing their healthy life. This impact is only noticeable once we reach old age. 
2. As elaborated by Dr Campbell in the documentary “Forks over Knives”, all nutrients work in a synergism like various instruments in a symphony. Often you don’t even hear the instrument, but the symphony is very pleasing and sounds beautiful. To isolate one instrument and enhance it would spoil the symphony. 
3. When you take a nutrient supplement, it often creates imbalances in other nutrients in your body. Here are a couple of examples:
• Taking calcium supplement which is one of the most commonly used supplement, can create Magnesium deficiency. 
• Taking Zinc supplement reduces Copper absorbability and taking Copper supplement creates imbalance in Zinc. 
How, trace minerals and many micro nutrients, affect our body is a science that is not fully understood yet, and lot more research has to be done. Some recent double blind studies have shown unexpected results as shown below:
1. CARET randomized trial of 18,000 participants showed unexpected results. Higher mortality for those taking supplements. 
2. Vitamin E deficiency is very rare. Nurses health study of 87,000 nurses showed some benefit. But another Women’s Health Study of 40,000 women showed no benefits. 
3. Another large meta analysis of 47 high quality randomized trials of antioxidants on 181,000 individuals showed the opposite results of increased all cause mortality. 
4. Iowa Women’s Study of 38,772 women ages 55-69 showed that antioxidant supplements caused 2.4% absolute increase in all cause mortality. NNH number was 42 meaning that every 42nd woman suffered a harm. 
5. There are several studies that show health improvement with supplements but they all are in population where people were starved and didn’t have enough food. 
6. Vitamin D sales almost doubled from 2008 to 2009. Vitamin D levels below 20 should be addressed by increasing sun exposure during sunny months. Vitamin D supplement studies are controversial. 
7. The research on calcium supplements is also controversial with conflicting results. 
8. Omega-3 supplements study have not shown improvement and in some cases were found harmful. 
9. Two time Nobel prize winner Linus Pauling was wrong about his conclusion about vitamin C supplements. At the time of Linus Pauling science wasn’t advanced enough. He believed it and there was good science behind it but no randomized trials were done. Vitamin C supplements have not shown any improvements in randomized trials. 
10. Science is always evolving. Here is a quote by Dr. Jeffery Tice of UCSF  “We are doing many things now, that we were taught not to do. We had understanding from really good science …. but we were wrong. When we do randomized trials we often find opposite results….. I think it is absolutely fine to get it (nutrients) from kale instead of pills, we don’t understand enough about biology and we should do what nature intended us to do, mostly eating fruits and vegetables.”
So the safest approach is to avoid all supplements. Vitamin B12 is the only exception and that is because municipal water that we consume is chlorinated; which destroys all vitamin B12. 
Also taking a supplement creates a false sense of security and makes us pay less attention to diet. All nutrient deficiencies should be compensated by consuming balanced meals. We must add foods to our diet that we have been missing. My recommendation to eat green leafy vegetables, berries, flaxseeds and walnuts serves this purpose. 
Creating and propagating a reductionist and deficiency mindset serves the purpose of the Processed Food and Supplements industry well.
The nutrition science has focused on these two approaches for the past several decades and in spite of the wealth of academic knowledge on nutrition and chronic diseases one does not see any dent in the growth in such diseases. It makes one wonder, why is it so. One explanation is that field of nutrition has become more about marketing profitable products than educating people about fundamentals of health and wellness. 
After having explained the role of nutrients, I want to emphasize that one must unlearn everything and only remember that
“Food not Nutrients, is the fundamental Unit in Nutrition”.
I am attaching some videos and an article on this subject. Please watch and read. 👇
Do we need vitamins and supplements?
https://youtu.be/q1GSd5AhmO8
The following are longer lecture on the subject and those who want to know in more detail should watch them. 
Vitamins & Supplements:Less is More
https://youtu.be/h06XTRT4z-c
Understanding Supplements 
https://youtu.be/PkzcOY9LmgM
"Today people just supplement calcium because the doctor say calcium is good for you, Calcium prevents osteoporosis you need for your bones. India and the US are the highest consumers of calcium and vitamin d3 supplements. And India and the US have the highest amount of cases when it comes to osteoporosis and poor bone health. There is no direct correlation between calcium and osteoporosis. We need calcium for good bone health but we need the right quality of calcium and we need the right amount of d3 and magnesium to absorb calcium from the foods that you eat. *So just taking more and more calcium actually depletes you of magnesium because calcium requires magnesium for absorption.* We actually look at getting calcium naturally from food sources like sesame or til seeds, green leafy vegetables, nuts, seeds and whole grains. *If you have a balanced diet you get sufficient calcium.*
http://www.lukecoutinho.com/.../an-important-trace.../
