7.9 ERECTILE DISFUNCTION 
Erectile disfunction is inability to attain and/or maintain penile erection during sex, also called impotence. Erectile disfunction is one of the most common condition among men. By some estimates over one third of all  men over age 50 suffer from it. 
It is well known that men with ED have higher rate of heart attack and stroke. That is why it is called canary in a  cole mine for cardio vascular health. 
Getting a prescription for oral medication like Viagra, Levitra or Cialis works for two third of the patients but it is only a symptomatic relief and not a cure. These drugs are also not without side effects and adverse drug reactions. One has to change the diet and lifestyle to cure this condition and the good news is that such cure also reduces the risk of future cardio vascular diseases. Changing over to PBWF/IF/10K diet and lifestyle achieves great results. This subject is discussed briefly in the documentary “Forks over Knives” and in some detail in the documentary “The Game Changers” which shows how a single meal of high fat and animal food can effect overnight erections during sleep. 
Penis is made up of sponge like erectile tissues, which when filled with blood cause erection. When aroused,  the brain sends a neurotransmitter signal that releases nitric oxide and increases the blood flow to penis. 
The main cause of ED is a blood flow issue. Alcohol, tobacco and many drugs prescribed to treat BP, like diuretics and beta blockers can cause ED. There can be other causes like prostate surgery or in some cases psychosocial or neurological  problems but we will only focus on the vascular causes. 
If you read any articles on ED, you will find them, state that conditions that increase the risk of ED are high BP, high cholesterol, weight gain, obesity and diabetes. This is quite misleading. 
High BP or high cholesterol do not cause ED. The foods that causes high BP, high cholesterol and diabetes, cause ED also. 
We have already discussed how consuming inflammatory foods causes atherosclerosis and thereby reduces the effective opening of the blood vessels, reducing the blood flow. It also reduces the release of nitric oxide(NO) from the endothelial cells which make the internal lining of the blood vessels. Penis requires good blood flow to get an erection. 
Nitric Oxide is a physiologic signal essential to penile erection, and disorders that reduce NO synthesis or release in the erectile tissues are commonly associated with erectile dysfunction. NO synthase (NOS) catalyzes production of NO from L-arginine.
So to cure ED, one needs to reverse the atherosclerosis and repair the endothelium. This requires Nitric oxide into the blood system which can be achieved by consuming the amino acid L-arginine. 
A variety of plant based foods provide L-arginine:
* Soybean, pumpkin and sesame seeds, peanuts and walnuts
* Sweet green peppers and seaweed spiraling
* Grains such as quinoa, oats and wheat germ
To reverse atherosclerosis the best foods, rich in nitrates are green leafy vegetables and beetroots. We have already discussed this at length earlier.
Survival of the Firmest: Erectile Disfunction and Death.
https://youtu.be/mQuJxN9uP7w
Best foods to improve sexual function.
https://youtu.be/1kuL0TmYI9o
Erectile Disfunction Treatment.
https://youtu.be/FKSHjtR9Qxo
Role of diet in declining sperm count.
https://youtu.be/R57ynFaQdWk
Do men who have more sex live longer?
https://youtu.be/-9XdbwrenFY
Pistachio nut for Erectile Disfunction.
https://youtu.be/TewYl_Yl310
A single meal that changes sexual performance.
https://youtu.be/gt9Z3iycVOk
