6.14 SIDE EFFECTS AND ADR
Most of us are aware of the concept of side effects of drugs. Side effects can be negative or even positive. The goal of any drug manufacturer is to minimize the negative side effects of any drugs. Of course if the side effects are severe a drug would not get approval form the regulating authorities. Also most side effects are evaluated over shorter time frames so if a side effect is only visible after prolonged use, say over decades, it is unlikely to be detected by the regulating authorities. All drug manufacturers try their best to minimize the disclosure of side effects and disclose only those that they can’t get away with, and are required to be disclosed by the drug regulating authorities. We also know that all human beings are different and just like specific foods affect us differently, specific drugs also affect us differently. As a result it is difficult to catch all the side effects of a drug in any drug  trial. It is not unreasonable to assume that there there are certain side effects that your doctor is not aware of. It has been known for some time that many diabetic medications cause hear disease. There is no requirement for diabetic drug manufacturers to demonstrate that their medication does not increase the risk of heart disease; all they have to demonstrate is that it reduces blood glucose levels. I personally had to stop using Avenida due to this finding and replaced it with Actos. Few years later I had to stop  Actos also for the same reason. This is when I changed my diet and lifestyle. If you are a diabetic patient your doctor is so confident that you will develop heart disease that they insist on you going on Statin drugs as a preventive measure. Interestingly the reverse is also true if you are a heart patients and on drugs your likelihood of getting diabetes is substantially higher.  
The difference between Side Effects of a Drug and Adverse Drug Reactions (ADR) is often misunderstood. 
Side Effect is a term often used to refer to a drug’s unintended effects that occur within the therapeutic range, usually (but not always) an undesirable secondary effect which occurs in addition to the desired therapeutic effect of a drug or medication. Side effects may vary from individual to individual.
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) is 
“A response to a medicinal product which is noxious and unintended.” 
All drugs have the potential for adverse reactions, it is assumed that between 3% and 7% of all hospitalizations are due to adverse drug reactions. Adverse drug reactions occur at doses normally used for therapy. Drug overdose is totally a different concept. 
The leading cause of ADRs is multiple drug interactions. It is very important for those who are taking multiple drugs, to verify that there is no adverse interaction among those drugs. 
The situation gets even more complicated when we take into account that individuals respond differently to each drug, so multiple drugs response among  individuals is likely to be even more complex. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in US maintains a data base and all care providers are required to report ADRs and it is available for public access. There is a drug interaction checker hosted by Medscape that I have linked below. 
Of course if you can get off the drugs the whole problem goes away.
Side Effects vs Adverse Effects
https://youtu.be/lfDOseggwVA
Adverse Drug Reaction vs Adverse Events
https://youtu.be/z7C6Uc1G5kE
